1. Introduction
Docetaxel is one of the most effective chemotherapeutic agents used in the treatment of patients with breast cancer .
However , breast cancers may be either intrinsically resistant , or develop acquired resistance , to docetaxel as treatment occurs .
Resistance to docetaxel is a major clinical problem , which limits its effectiveness in the treatment of patients with breast cancer .
To date , the mechanisms of docetaxel resistance are poorly understood .
Recent studies , however , have indicated that a limited number of genes may contribute towards resistance to docetaxel and another taxane , paclitaxel .
These genes can be categorised as either being those specifically involved in the anti-tumour mode of action of taxanes , or those involved commonly in resistance to many different chemotherapeutic agents .
Docetaxel exerts its effects by binding to ß-tubulin subunits of microtubules .
This results in preventing the depolymerisation of microtubules , blocking cell growth in the G2-M phase , and resulting in apoptosis .
Mutations in ß-tubulin , the disruption of microtubule dynamics , and the differential expression of ß-tubulin isoforms in lung and breast tumours have been associated with resistance to docetaxel and paclitaxel .
The second category of genes , involved in drug resistance , encode proteins that are commonly involved in allowing resistance to occur to many other chemotherapeutic agents .
For example , overexpression of drug transporters such as P-glycoprotein , which increases drug efflux from the cell or drug metabolising enzymes such as CYP3A4 , oncogenes such as Src protein kinase or tumour suppressor genes such as BRCA2 are all believed to be important in the resistance to several chemotherapeutic agents .
However , such mechanisms do not account for resistance to chemotherapeutic agents in all tumours .
It is important to identify the novel genes that may be involved in chemotherapy resistance to allow a more complete understanding of the mechanisms involved in docetaxel resistance .
The majority of previous studies investigating resistance to docetaxel and paclitaxel have adopted a candidate gene approach .
Such an approach , which by its nature is focused on individual candidate genes , may fail to identify novel genes involved in mechanisms of drug resistance because it does not allow a global genomic assessment to be made .
A novel genomic approach to understanding drug resistance is __CGH__ , which has been used widely in cancer research to identify novel regions of genomic amplification and / or deletion .
CGH involves the hybridisation of different fluorescently labelled genomic DNA ( from two different samples , e.g. , tumour versus normal ) to normal human metaphase chromosomes .
Following hybridisation , the pattern of differential fluorescence along the length of each chromosome is visualised by fluorescent microscopy and analysed using computer software .
Chromosomal regions , which are either gained or lost in genomic DNA of one sample compared with another , can be identified using this technique .
The regions that are identified as being altered can then be searched to identify the genes , which may be involved in control of cellular growth .
Some initial studies have applied a modified version of CGH to detect chromosomal imbalances specifically involved in the resistance to chemotherapeutic agents such as 5 fluorouracil , fluoropyrimidines and the platinums .
However , the genomic changes specifically involved in resistance to docetaxel have not previously been reported .
This study aims to identify novel regions of genomic change involved in resistance to docetaxel by carrying out CGH in breast cancer cell lines made resistant to docetaxel .
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Cell culture
Human breast can__USA__ ) .
The docetaxel-resistant sub-lines were gener__UK__ ) , as described previously .
2.2. Cytotoxic assay
Docetaxel resistance was demonstrated in the cell lines by means of the 3- ( 4-5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl ) -2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide ( MTT ) dye reduction assay .
The MTT assay was also used to determine the sensitivity of the cell lines to other chemotherapeutic agents : doxorubicin ( Mayne Pharma Plc , Warwickshire , __UK__ ) , 5 fluorouracil ( Sigma , Gillingham , Dorset , __UK__ ) , paclitaxel ( Sigma ) and vincristine ( Sigma ) .
Direct cell counts , using trypan blue solution , were also obtained to determine the concentration of docetaxel required to cause 50% inhibition of cell growth ( known as the IC50 value ) , as described previously .
2.3. __CGH__
A modified CGH reaction was carried out as described previously , with the following amendments .
CGH was performed using MCF-7 and the MDA-MB-231 cells and their docetaxel-resistant sub-lines .
Genomic DNA was isolated from the cell lines using a QIAamp® DNA mini kit ( Qiagen , Crawley , West Sussex , __UK__ ) .
DNA concentration was quantified by fluorometry ( Sigma ) .
Nick translation was performed to generate DNA fragments between 200 and 2000 bp long .
The CGH reaction incorporated 800 ng Spectrum Red-labelled DNA ( Abbott Laboratories , Maidenhead , __UK__ ) and 800 ng Spectrum Green-labelled DNA ( Abbott Laboratories ) .
To block repetitive DNA sequences , 100 times excess Cot-1 DNA ( Abbott Laboratories ) was used .
The DNA was precipitated with 10% ( w / v ) 3 M sodium acetate ( pH 7 ) and 2.5 times volume 100% ethanol .
The DNA pellet was dried and re-suspended in hybridisation buffer ( 70% ( v / v ) formamide , 10% ( v / v ) dextran sulphate , 2 × SSC ) .
Normal human metaphase chromosomes were obtained from lymphocyte cultures and the resulting slides were denatured at 75 °C for 5 min in denaturation solution ( 70% ( v / v ) formamide , 2 × SSC ) .
The labelled DNA was denatured at 74 °C for 5 min before hybridisation with the metaphase spreads and incubated in a humidified incubator at 37 °C for 5 d .
Post-hybridisation washes consisted of : 3 s in 0.4 × SSC , 0.3% ( v / v ) Igepal at 74 °C ; and 3 s in 2 × SSC , 0.1% ( v / v ) Igepal at room temperature .
The slides were briefly air __DAPI__ .
In order to confirm the genomic alterations observed , the experiments were repeated with reverse labelling .
In addition , the experiments were repeated in duplicate with DNA isolated from two independent extractions .
2.4. Digital image analysis
Metaphase chromosomes were captured with a Zeiss Axioplan II fluorescent microscope connected to a cooled charged coupled device camera ( Photometrics , Waterloo , Canada ) .
Three single colour images were taken for each metaphase using Spectrum Green , Spectrum Red and __DAPI__ filters .
The images were then processed using the Powergene Macintosh version 4.5 software ( Applied Imaging , Newcastle , __UK__ ) .
At least 15 - 20 metaphases were captured per slide .
Chromosomal regions were expressed as a gain if the green-to-red ratio was greater than 1.15 and losses were expressed as less than 0.85. A chromosomal region was identified as a genomic change if the same chromosomal region was altered in every replicate .
2.5. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation
Whole chromosome paints were obtained from Qbiogene ( Livingston , __UK__ ) and denatured according to manufacturer 's instructions .
A Bcl-2 specific DNA probe ( Qbiogene ) was used according to manufacturer 's instructions .
__BAC__ DNA probes , RP11-91M13 , RP11-72J24 and RP11-89O20 , mapping to chromosome 7q21.1 , 7q22.2 and 7q31.1 , respectively , were obtained from __BAC__ PAC resources ( California , __USA__ ) .
DNA was obtained and prepared as described previously .
__BAC__ DNA probes were re-suspended in 10 µl CEP hybridisation buffer ( Abbott Laboratories ) and denatured at 96 °C for 5 min .
The metaphase chromosome slides were prepared from the cell lines by incubating 70% confluent cells with 350 µl colcemid for 2 h 20 min , before trypsinising and fixing three times in 3:1 methanol:acetic acid .
The resulting slides were denatured at 75 °C for 2 min in denaturation solution ( 70% ( v / v ) formamide , 2 × SSC ) , followed by the addition of the denatured __BAC__ DNA probes to the denatured chromosomes , prior to incubating in a humidified incubator at 37 °C for 16 h .
Post-hybridisation washes for the Bcl-2 probe consisted of : 2 min in 0.4 × SSC , 0.3% ( v / v ) Igepal at 74 °C ; and 1 min in 2 × SSC , 0.1% ( v / v ) Igepal at room temperature .
In contrast , whole chromosome paints and __BAC__ DNA probes were washed for 15 s .
The slides were briefly air dried and stained with 0.1 µg / ml __DAPI__ .
The specificity of all DNA probes was checked by hybridisation to normal human metaphase chromosomes .
2.6. Western analysis for P-glycoprotein expression
Western analysis was carried out as described previously , with the following amendments .
Ten micrograms of protein was electrophoresed through a precast 7.5% tris - glycine polyacrylamide gel ( Cambrex Bioscience , Nottingham , __UK__ ) .
Each membrane was incubated with 1:200 dilution ( in 5% ( w / v ) milk / Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% ( v / v ) Tween 20 ) of mouse monoclonal anti-human MDR-1 antibody ( Autogen Bioclear , Calne , Wiltshire , __UK__ ) or 1:5000 ß-actin ( Abchem , Cambridge , __UK__ ) for 1 h at room temperature .
The experiments were repeated in triplicate with protein isolated from two independent extractions .
3. Results
3.1. Confirmation of resistance to docetaxel in the developed docetaxel-resistant sub-lines
Firstly , the in vitro effect of docetaxel on cell growth was determined using a standard cell viability assay .
This demonstrated that docetaxel was more cytotoxic in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells than in their resistant sub-lines ( MCF-7 TAX30 and MDA-MB-231 TAX30 , respectively ) , which had acquired resistance following sequential exposure to a maximum 30 µmol / l docetaxel over a period of 50 weeks .
The MTT assay demonstrated that even at 30 µmol / l docetaxel , there was still an MTT activity of 50% in the parental MCF-7 cells .
However , this may be related to a possible biphasic response to docetaxel , but it is also well recognised that docetaxel can cause an increase in absorbance thus giving falsely elevated absorbance values .
Therefore , direct cell counts were carried out in order to determine the 50% inhibitory concentrations ( IC50 ) for docetaxel in the breast cancer cell lines .
This method allows a more accurate determination of the number of viable cells compared with the MTT assay .
The IC50 of docetaxel in MCF-7 cells was 0.015 µmol / l , whereas the MCF-7 TAX30 sub-lines had an IC50 value of 10 µmol / l .
The IC50 of docetaxel in MDA-MB-231 cells was 0.04 µmol / l , whereas the MDA-MB-231 TAX30 sub-lines had an IC50 value of 55 µmol / l .
Furthermore , MCF-7 TAX30 and MDA-MB-231 TAX30 resistant sub-lines exhibited cross-resistance to paclitaxel , vincristine and doxorubicin , but did not demonstrate cross-resistance to 5 fluorouracil ( data not shown ) .
3.2. Genomic regions associated with docetaxel resistance
CGH was used to identify genomic regions modified as a result of acquired drug resistance to docetaxel .
A common region of amplification of chromosome 7q and loss of chromosome 10q were identified in both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 docetaxel-resistant sub-lines .
MCF-7 TAX30 sub-lines exhibited a gain of chromosome 18 , however , chromosome 18 was lost in MDA-MB-231 TAX30 sub-lines .
Additional genetic alterations , distinct to each docetaxel-resistant cell line , were also identified .
Whole chromosome paints confirmed the presence of genetic aberrations that had initially been detected by CGH .
A specific DNA probe to Bcl-2 ( which is a gene encoded on chromosome 18q21.33 ) was used to investigate the genetic alteration of chromosome 18. The DNA probe for Bcl-2 was amplified in MCF-7 TAX30 sub-lines ( three hybridisation signals compared with two signals in MCF-7 cells ) , whereas the Bcl-2 probe signal was lost in MDA-MB-231 TAX30 sub-lines ( one hybridisation signal compared with two signals in MDA-MB-231 cells ) .
The Bcl-2 probe thus confirmed the CGH results for the genetic alterations on chromosome 18.
3.3. Confirmation of chromosome 7q genomic amplification in docetaxel-resistant breast cancer cells
CGH identified numerous genetic alterations in docetaxel-resistant sub-lines .
The next stage , therefore , was to localise the genomic regions further to identify candidate genes involved in resistance .
Since chromosome 7q demonstrated the greatest amplification peak , as detected by CGH , it was decided to focus on this chromosomal region .
Fluorescent in situ hybridisation was carried out with __BAC__ DNA probes to confirm the CGH-detected amplification of chromosome 7q in docetaxel-resistant sub-lines .
MCF-7 TAX30 resistant cells displayed an amplification of chromosome 7q21.11-q22.1 .
MCF-7 cells showed no amplification , using the __BAC__ DNA probe , RP11-91M13 ( mapping to the cytogenetic band 7q21.1 ) , however , there was a high level of amplification seen in the MCF-7 TAX30 resistant sub-lines , thus supporting the CGH results .
When the analysis was carried out on metaphase chromosomes , it was apparent that the signals were condensed to one chromosome region .
In addition , __BAC__ DNA probes , RP11-72J24 and RP11-89O20 ( mapping to the cytogenetic band 7q22.2 and 7q31.1 , respectively ) , which both lie outside the CGH amplified region in MCF-7 TAX30 resistant cells , were not amplified .
MDA-MB-231 TAX30 resistant cells exhibited two distinct bands of amplification at chromosome 7q21 and 7q31 .
Using __BAC__ DNA probes mapping specifically to these two chromosomal regions , 7q21.1 ( RP11-91M13 ) and 7q31.1 ( RP11-89O20 ) , confirmed the CGH amplified regions in MDA-MB-231 TAX30 resistant cells .
Furthermore , a __BAC__ DNA probe , RP11-72J24 ( 7q22.2 ) , mapping between the two CGH amplified regions , was not amplified in MDA-MB-231 TAX30 resistant cells .
__BAC__ DNA probes , therefore , confirmed the amplification of chromosome 7q , detected by CGH , and support the use of CGH as an application to identify genomic aberrations .
3.4. P-glycoprotein overexpression is associated with docetaxel resistance
CGH identified a common region of chromosome 7q to be amplified in both docetaxel-resistant cell lines .
Furthermore , this amplification was confirmed using __BAC__ DNA probes mapping specifically to the region .
The next step was to determine whether the amplified genomic region was associated with protein overexpression .
A candidate gene encoded within this amplified region was MDR-1 , as increased expression of the protein product of this gene , P-glycoprotein , is a well-recognised multi-drug resistance mechanism .
Western analysis was carried out and this revealed that P-glycoprotein was overexpressed in both docetaxel-resistant sub-lines .
3.5. Effects of inhibition of P-glycoprotein ( by verapamil ) on resistance to docetaxel in docetaxel-resistant breast cancer cell lines
In order to determine whether P-glycoprotein was involved in resistance , the level of resistance to docetaxel in the resistant breast cancer cell lines was measured in the presence of the calcium-channel blocker , verapamil , which is known to inhibit the function of P-glycoprotein .
The in vitro effect of docetaxel and verapamil on cell growth of the docetaxel-resistant breast cancer cell lines was determined using a standard cell viability assay .
Verapamil ( 10 µmol / l ) demonstrated greater docetaxel-induced cytotoxicity at lower concentrations of docetaxel ( less than 0.05 µmol / l ) in both resistant cell lines .
When 100 µmol / l verapamil was used , however , resistance was only notably reversed at higher concentrations of docetaxel ( 75 - 100 µmol / l ) .
These results demonstrate that a P-glycoprotein inhibitor , verapamil , enhances docetaxel-induced cytotoxicity in docetaxel-resistant cells at specific concentrations .
4. Discussion
This study is the first global analysis of the genetic events involved in resistance to docetaxel , where a high-level of resistance to docetaxel has been created .
We identified a common amplified region of chromosome 7q21 and loss of chromosome 10q in two breast cancer cell lines , during the development of acquired resistance to docetaxel .
In addition , both docetaxel-resistant sub-lines also exhibit different genetic modifications .
This demonstrates that resistance to docetaxel is a multi-factorial phenomenon with many different genes contributing to the resistant phenotype .
A similar study using MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines , resistant to paclitaxel , demonstrated amplification of chromosome 7q .
It seems plausible , therefore , that chromosome 7q amplification may be a common event in the resistance to all taxanes .
A candidate gene encoded within this amplified region was MDR-1 , as increased expression of the protein product of this gene , P-glycoprotein , is a well-recognised multi-drug resistance mechanism .
We demonstrated that the expression of P-glycoprotein is increased in both docetaxel-resistant sub-lines when compared with the docetaxel-sensitive parental cell lines .
The identification of P-glycoprotein overexpression is important not just because it highlights a mechanism of resistance , but because it demonstrates that a gene encoded within an amplified chromosome region , detected by CGH , is involved in the generation of the resistant phenotype in these breast cancer cell lines .
In terms of chemotherapy resistance , however , this was only partially reversed by the addition of verapamil ( an inhibitor of P-glycoprotein ) .
Complete reversal of resistance still could not be achieved by increasing the concentration of verapamil even though a previous study has shown verapamil , at a concentration of 1 µmol / l , to almost completely reverse resistance in human pancreatic cancer cells , which had been made resistant to docetaxel .
The extent of the contribution of P-glycoprotein towards chemotherapy efflux is influenced by the extracellular concentration of the chemotherapeutic agent .
P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux of paclitaxel in BC19 human breast cancer cells is maximal at concentrations less than 200 nmol / l .
The authors noted that higher concentrations of paclitaxel decreased the rate of P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux .
If P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux of docetaxel is similarly influenced at different drug concentrations , this may explain why reversal of resistance in our docetaxel-resistant breast cancer cell lines was greater at certain concentrations of docetaxel .
Verapamil may only reverse resistance in breast cancer cells , which are overexpressing P-glycoprotein , at concentrations of docetaxel that are compatible with a P-glycoprotein-mediated efflux mechanism .
A different drug resistance mechanism may be involved in breast cancer cells that have a different extracellular concentration of docetaxel .
Our results , therefore , suggest that while increased expression of P-glycoprotein may be involved in resistance to docetaxel , it may not be the only mechanism involved .
It is possible that other genes contained within the amplification of chromosome 7 may be involved in docetaxel resistance .
For example , the cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP3A4 , CYP3A43 , CYP3A7 and CYP3A5 are located on chromosome 7q22.1 .
CYP3A4 is responsible for metabolising docetaxel into an inactive precursor , and is amplified in breast tumours that demonstrate a poor clinical response to docetaxel .
Other genes of interest in the region are the heat-shock proteins , HSPB1 , HSPC047 and DNAJB9 , since overexpression of some of these protein family members has been shown to be involved in resistance to other chemotherapeutic agents , including paclitaxel and cisplatin .
Altered expression of genes involved in cell cycle regulation and intracellular signalling pathways have been identified in breast tumours of patients who demonstrated a poor response to docetaxel therapy .
There are several genes located on chromosome 7q , such as DMTF1 , CDK6 , YWHAG and PTPN12 , which are involved in cell cycle regulation and signalling processes .
Although there are many genes located in this region , at the present time these have not been linked to chemotherapy resistance .
Indeed , this emphasises the usefulness of a global approach , such as CGH , as this may indicate the possible involvement of other genes , which hitherto have not been linked to the development of resistance to chemotherapeutic agents and can then be explored in this respect .
Both docetaxel-resistant cell lines exhibited a loss of chromosome 10q .
This chromosomal region has not previously been reported to be involved in resistance to either docetaxel or paclitaxel .
However , loss of the PTEN tumour suppressor gene , encoded on chromosome 10q23.31 , has been implicated in resistance to other chemotherapeutic agents , such as doxorubicin , in bladder and prostate cancer .
Furthermore , if the expression of PTEN protein is increased , by transfection of PTEN , this enhances doxorubicin-induced cytotoxicity in PTEN-negative PC-3 prostate cancer cells .
There are other genes of interest on chromosome 10q including other tumour suppressor genes ( e.g. , TRIM8 , TACC2 ) and genes involved in regulating the apoptotic pathway ( e.g. , BINP3 , BAG3 ) .
Docetaxel resistance may be acquired by loss of these genes , which may lead to a more aggressive cell type , or may lead to the cells escaping drug-induced apoptosis .
These genomic changes , however , remain to be validated in order to identify specific genes associated with docetaxel resistance .
A gain of chromosome 18 was observed in the MCF-7 resistant sub-lines whilst a region of it was lost in the MDA-MB-231 resistant sub-lines .
The gene for the anti-apoptosis protein Bcl-2 maps to this region .
We confirmed that Bcl-2 was amplified in MCF-7 docetaxel-resistant breast cancer cells but , in contrast , is deleted in MDA-MB-231 resistant cell lines .
This may be important because regulation of Bcl-2 has been shown to be an important process involved in the cellular response to taxanes .
Modulation of Bcl-2 expression may present a mechanism by which cells become resistant to docetaxel .
This may initially seem surprising since the chromosomal region containing Bcl-2 is both gained and lost , depending upon the type of docetaxel-resistant cell line .
However , the paradoxical role of Bcl-2 has previously been shown with response to paclitaxel but not docetaxel .
Overexpression of Bcl-2 is associated with resistance to paclitaxel in myeloma cells .
In contrast , reduced expression of Bcl-2 has been associated with resistance to paclitaxel in A2780 human ovarian cancer cell lines .
It is possible that the docetaxel-resistant sub-lines have acquired different mechanisms to control the apoptotic pathway and prevent chemotherapy-induced cytotoxicity .
The genes contained within the other genomic regions could exert their effects by a number of mechanisms .
These include increased expression of drug transporters ( ABCA1 , CFTR ) , increased expression of enzymes involved in metabolising docetaxel ( CYP3A4 ) , and aberrant expression of proteins involved with microtubule dynamics ( TUBB4Q , EMAP ) , regulators of the cell cycle ( CDKN1A , NEK6 , CHEK1 ) and apoptotic pathways ( CASP3 , BAK , BCL-2 ) .
During this study , we used CGH to detect regions of genomic aberrations associated with docetaxel resistance .
However , CGH has limitations , and has only been shown to detect regions of amplification larger than 5 Mb and regions of deletion greater than 10 Mb .
Small genomic aberrations , therefore , will remain undetected and the genomic regions identified by CGH may contain many genes .
Furthermore , the results obtained from our study depend on the use of well-established human cancer cell lines as a suitable in vitro model of drug resistance .
A consideration when using cell lines to study the biology and behaviour of cancer cells in vitro is that prolonged culture may result in modifications to genetic and phenotypic stability .
Therefore , we have cultured resistant and sensitive cells in parallel , and limited the number of passages to try to minimise these effects and we avoid prolonged culture .
The molecular mechanisms involved in drug resistance in vitro may differ from the mechanisms involved with in vivo drug resistance , which may be due to differences in drug administration .
Furthermore , our model utilises cells that have a high-level of acquired resistance to docetaxel , which represents a specific situation .
A previous study , however , demonstrated a good correlation between genomic aberrations identified in cancer cell lines with those found in tumours L.R. Hiorns , M.J. Seckl and F. Paradinas et al. , A molecular cytogenetic approach to studying platinum resistance , J Inorg Biochem 77 ( 1999 ) , pp. 95 - 104 .
Article | PDF ( 1146 K ) | View Record in Scopus | Cited By in Scopus ( 9 ) .
Another important study has shown that the patterns of gene expression in breast cancer cells in vitro , exposed to chemotherapeutic agents , was similar to those observed in patients with breast tumours treated with these drugs .
A more detailed and accurate assessment of the genes involved in drug resistance could be obtained using microarray expression analyses or proteomics .
A recent study , however , combining CGH and RNA microarrays , demonstrated that 60% of the genomic changes identified by CGH correlated directly with changes in mRNA expression .
This is the first description of a genomic approach to identify changes specifically involved in acquired resistance to docetaxel in breast cancer cells .
We have demonstrated that one of the genes contained within the amplified region may contribute to the resistant phenotype .
It is therefore feasible that genes contained within other genomic regions may also be involved .
The genetic regions identified will be investigated further to identify which genes play a key role in docetaxel resistance .
Understanding the genetic events involved in resistance to chemotherapy may allow further development in modulating drug resistance , and may be important in allowing selection of appropriate patients who are most likely to benefit from such therapies .
