Introduction
In screening for disease , some false negative tests are inevitable .
The likelihood of false negative tests is taken into account in the public health policy decision to implement a screening programme .
Nevertheless a false negative may have important consequences for the individual concerned .
In those who have a suspicious mammographic finding and are recalled for further assessment , it is possible in principle to avoid false negative results almost completely .
While audit of the original screening radiology is often practised,1 , 2 and 3 audit of the assessment process for suspicious screens is less common.4 In our companion paper , we have summarised the results of an audit of cancers occurring in women previously assessed with negative findings.5 The major shortcomings in assessment practice identified in the audit related to a failure to perform percentaneous biopsy or suboptimal practices of percentaneous biopsy , such as failure to repeat inadequate biopsies .
It is likely that practice has improved considerably since the period studied in this audit , since practice was observed to improve systematically with time during the audit periods .
In addition , the purpose of the audit was non-judgemental : the main aim was to identify the likely cases missed at assessment , the probable reasons for this , and the consequent targets for monitoring , training and practice .
The latter were consistent with the 2001 guidelines for assessment.6
Here we examine observed short-term survival , estimate future survival using the attributes of the tumours diagnosed and the likely consequences of amending procedures to avoid false negatives at assessment .
These estimates may be helpful in reinforcing educational messages for our own screening programmes and others .
It also gives an estimate of the benefit of good assessment procedures .
Methods
The details of the audit of cancers diagnosed in women with a previous negative assessment are described in our companion paper.5 Assessments were judged to be satisfactory or not according to the procedures carried out at the original assessment compared with the procedures outlined in the 2001 guidelines.6 These include specific recommendations with respect to further mammography , clinical examination , ultrasound , percutaneous biopsy and surgical biopsy .
Further details are described in our companion paper.5 From the start of screening in the seven centres in the East Anglian region , 1 April 1989 to 31 December 1999 , 503493 women from a total population of 2.2 million were screened , 25346 were recalled for an assessment and 3689 were diagnosed with breast cancer .
Of the 21657 women given a negative result at these assessments , 193 women were subsequently diagnosed with 194 breast tumours at the site previously assessed .
Of these , 139 assessments were judged to be unsatisfactory .
The original assessments took place between the implementation of screening in the East Anglian region at the beginning of April 1989 to a last assessment date of 31 December 1999 .
Tumours were diagnosed up to 31 December 2000 .
Follow-up for survival was available to 1 December 2003 .
In tracking survival the duration of follow-up after diagnosis ranged from 6.4 months to 13 years 9 months .
Women still alive on 1 December 2003 were defined as censored in the survival analysis .
Survival was estimated using the Kaplan - Meier method and effects of tumour and host attributes on survival were assessed using Cox regression.7 We estimated long-term survival based on the size and node status of the tumours diagnosed , using the results of the survival analysis of 2468 tumours diagnosed during a trial of breast screening in Sweden.8 , 9 and 10 For two-sample comparisons of continuous quantities , the Wilcoxon rank sum test was used .
In addition we used estimated rates of progression of disease with respect to tumour size and node status from the same Swedish trial to estimate the distribution of size and node status which would have been observed in the invasive cases if the tumours had been detected at the original assessment , based on the results of Markov process models.10 and 11 Details of the estimation are given in the Appendix A. From these results we further estimated the predicted survival which would accrue from improving the assessment process to eliminate a proportion of the false negatives at assessment .
Our procedures can therefore be summarised as follows :
( 1 ) Take observed long-term survival by tumour size and node status from an external source .
( 2 ) Apply ( 1 ) above to the observed size and node status distributions in our tumour population , to predict long-term survival .
( 3 ) Identify a putative set of cases likely to have been missed at assessment and for which improved assessment procedures might have been expected to result in detection of the case .
( 4 ) Using external estimates of tumour progression with respect to size and node status , estimate the likely distribution of these factors if the tumours had been diagnosed at the original assessment .
( 5 ) Predict the long-term survival from ( 4 ) and compare with that predicted from the actual size and node status distribution .
The third aim requires making a judgement as to which cases were missed at assessment due to suboptimal assessment , and which would have been diagnosed with better assessment procedures .
Clearly those cases for which the assessment was judged satisfactory in the audit do not fall into this category .
Cases which might have been detected with better assessment procedures must come largely or entirely from those where the original assessment was judged to be unsatisfactory .
We therefore estimated the predicted benefit of improved assessment under two assumptions : first that all of the tumours arising after assessments judged to be unsatisfactory would have been detected at the assessment with improved procedures ; Second , that only those tumours from this group which were View the MathML source in size at subsequent presentation would have been detected with improved assessment .
Results
Table 1 shows numbers of tumours by size and node status , ages at assessment and diagnosis , deaths from breast cancer and deaths from other causes by whether the original assessment was retrospectively judged to be satisfactory according to the 2001 guidelines6 ( referred to as assessment quality hereafter for brevity ) .
The table also shows age at original assessment and at diagnosis .
Overall , there were more deaths in women with unsatisfactory assessments .
Age at assessment and age at diagnosis did not substantially vary by assessment quality ( satisfactory or unsatisfactory ) .
In the 194 tumours as a whole , 5 year survival was estimated as 93% ( 95% CI : 88 - 97% ) .
For deaths from all causes , the figure was 91% ( 95% CI : 86 - 95% ) .
Due to the small numbers of deaths , we use deaths from all causes in the analyses below .
Table 2 shows the results of Cox regression , giving hazard ratios for tumour size , node status and assessment quality .
The effect of assessment quality was not statistically significant but very suggestive of better survival for women who had satisfactory assessments .
The effects of size and node status on survival were as one might expect .
Women with positive node status had significantly poorer survival than women with no nodal involvement and although the association between survival and the dichotomised size of tumour was not significant , there was a significant trend of increasing hazard ratio as tumour size in millimetres increased , after adjustment for the other factors ( P=0.02 ) .
Figure 1 shows survival by size and node status .
Table 3 shows the 20 year survival rates by size and node status , estimated from the Swedish study data .
Applying these rates to the invasive cases in Table 1 , we predict that 20 year survival in our invasive cases overall will be 66% ( 50 breast cancer deaths ) .
The corresponding figures for those with satisfactory and unsatisfactory assessments are 67% ( 15 deaths ) and 66% ( 35 deaths ) , respectively .
Chen et al.10 and Chen11 estimated the instantaneous progression rates from node negative to node positive cancer as 0.2315 .
This corresponds to around 21% of node negative tumours progressing to node positive within one year if left untreated .
The corresponding rate of progression from a tumour smaller than 2 cm to one of size 2 cm or more was estimated as 0.2727 , which implies that 24% of tumours smaller than 2 cm would be expected to grow to 2 cm or larger within one year .
In our first analysis , we assumed that an improvement in practice could have led to the detection at the original in those assessments which were unsatisfactory according to the 2001 guidelines , but not in those which were judged to be satisfactory .
We estimated , using the methods in the Appendix A , the size and node status of the tumours which would have been observed had the former group of tumours been detected at the original assessment .
Table 4 shows the results of applying the predicted survival in Table 4 to the actual observed size and node status distribution , and to that expected if the tumours with unsatisfactory original assessment had been diagnosed at the original assessment .
This gives an expected number of deaths over 20 years of 41 , a saving of 9 lives , or an 18% reduction in expected fatality in this special group of tumours .
In our companion paper we estimated that 45% ( 59 cases ) of those excluded due to missing information would also be potentially false negative assessments .
We therefore estimate that these will have 67% survival and therefore 19 deaths , of which 18% , 3 deaths , could have been avoided if diagnosis had taken place at the original assessment .
In our second analysis , we assumed that only the tumours of size 20 mm or more at eventual presentation would have been detected at original assessment with improved procedures .
This would have resulted in the node status / size distribution in Table 5. When the tumours with satisfactory assessments are added to these , this in turn would imply 43 deaths , a 14% reduction in fatality in this tumour population .
Discussion
The results reported here suggest that improvement in the assessment process could have led to a reduction in deaths from breast cancer in this specialist tumour population of cancers in women previously assessed for a suspicious finding in the anatomical location of the subsequent diagnosed cancer of 14 - 18% in the long run .
It should be borne in mind that this is a small and very special group , representing only a small proportion ( 1% ) 5 of women assessed for positive screening results .
However , failure to detect at assessment a tumour which has given rise to a screening recall is a serious failure of the system and the screening programme has a duty to minimise such failures and their consequent mortality and morbidity .
It should be realised that these results arise from the start of screening in the UK and all the procedures used and their application were not yet developed to their present standard of effectiveness .
The guidelines used as the benchmark were published in 200110 and the last assessment in our study took place before December 1999 .
The tumours with assessments judged to be unsatisfactory had only slightly poorer predicted long-term survival than those with satisfactory assessment ( 66% compared to 67% ) although early observed survival was poorer .
They did have poorer lymph node status ( 33% positive compared to 24% ) , but slightly smaller size .
This suggests that the probability of presence of tumour at the original assessment was similar for the two groups .
The difference between the two groups therefore relates to the quality of assessment rather than to the tumours .
Our basic assumption was that if the assessment was satisfactory , there is no prospect for improved assessment to enhance the process of diagnosis , and this seems reasonable .
Our results depend on other assumptions , notably the exponential distribution of times to transition ( to node positive or large tumours ) .
This assumption is probably reasonable , judging by the goodness of fit observed in the past.10 Also , the magnitude of the long-term benefits of improvement seems consistent with an additional 3 years advance in the time of diagnosis of the tumours .
We have not dealt with the possibility of further saving of life from some of the invasive tumours having been in situ at the previous assessment .
Thus our results may be conservative , although not greatly so , since there is evidence that detection of ductal carcinoma in situ accounts for only a minority of the benefit of screening.12
Since the implementation of breast screening in various countries as a result of the trials that took place in the 1970s and 1980s , there has been a steady evolution of practice .
The procedures used at assessment have developed throughout this time .
Initially the professionals working in the new service ( and whose work is reported here ) had to work out for themselves how best to assess the cases recalled on account of suspicious mammograms using the available methods .
In our region this was initially dependent on fine needle aspiration cytology , not available in all our units , magnification mammography and ultrasound using machines which would now be regarded as crude .
Large-scale implementation of screening has driven development of improved tools for all the procedures and commercial investment to give the hardware to support a substantial screening industry .
This has been coupled with a research effort , reporting the various new techniques and technologies .
This research is a tradition of the breast-screening programme in many countries , and makes breast screening an exemplar of evidence-based practice .
Our study demonstrates a potential for improvement in practice .
It is likely that many of the improvements required to achieve this potential benefit have already been made .
Throughout the region whose work is described here , both skills and hardware have changed considerably .
An equivalent audit describing the next decade of screening would in all likelihood give different results .
In particular there has been increased use of , and expertise in , percutaneous biopsy , with a documented rise in the use of cytology / core biopsy in women recalled for assessment from 14.3% in 1989 - 1993 to 30.9% for 1996 - 1999 in our original paper.5 This trend is significant ( Cuzick 's test13 z=2.52 , P=0.01 ) and has continued since then , with 34.3% of all women recalled for assessment in 2002 / 2003 now undergoing some form of percutaneous biopsy ( figure from the East Anglian Breast Screening Units annual KC62 returns ) .
Nevertheless the educational message has to be constantly reinforced that failure to diagnose a case of cancer at assessment is likely to have a cost , estimated here , of life years for the particular patient .
Although we have good guidelines and better tools , those who apply them must be constantly vigilant in their application .
This is a reason for constant professional development based on audit of results , and justifies the continuing quality assurance effort and investment applied to the breast-screening programme .
