Breast cancer is the most common cancer to affect women , with over 40000 new cases being detected and around 13000 women dying from the disease in Britain each year ( CancerStats , 2005 ) .
The prognosis of breast cancer has traditionally been based on prognostic factors , such as tumour size , nodal status and histological grade , that have been derived from population-based studies .
To improve the accuracy of predicting prognosis , scoring systems that combine these factors have been developed , such as the __NPI__ .
However , these prognostic factors are less accurate predictors of prognosis in an individual patient , owing to widely differing disease behaviour that ranges from slow-growing , nonmetastasising disease with an excellent prognosis , to fast-growing disease with a propensity for early metastasis and rapid death .
In contrast to the well-defined behaviour of breast cancer in a population , the molecular aetiology of cancer initiation and progression is not fully understood .
Genes involved in biological ageing may be informative in this context , as the incidence of cancer increases as a function of chronological age .
Specifically , genes involved in NAD+-dependent protein deacetylation may have a role to play in cancer pathogenesis .
These genes comprise the sirtuins , orthologues of the yeast __SIR2__ family of genes .
Sirtuins are a highly conserved set of genes found in organisms ranging from bacteria to man , involved in a variety of essential cell processes , including ageing , preventing differentiation , apoptosis and resistance to metabolic stress .
We have previously hypothesised that sirtuins , which link the functions of the mitochondrion , telomere nucleo-protein complex and ribosome production ( the MTR ) , may be important contributors to a wide range of ageing related diseases including cancer .
Consequently , we have undertaken a study designed to investigate sirtuin expression in breast cancer .
Seven sirtuins ( SIRT1-7 ) have so far been reported in humans .
Of these , SIRT2 and 7 have been associated with particular cancers with widely varying natural histories , SIRT2 with gliomas and SIRT7 with thyroid cancer .
Given the association of sirtuin expression with clinical behaviour , we investigated sirtuin expression in breast cancer to determine if changes in the transcriptional expression of individual sirtuins correlated with malignancy and disease stage .
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell culture
Sirtuin expression was initially studied in replicatively ageing mammary epithelial cell lines .
These included a primary mammary epithelial cell line ( HMEC ) obtained from Clonetics , UK , an immortalized nontumorigenic MCF-12A breast cell line from the Department of Pathology , University of Glasgow and a tumorigenic MCF-7 breast cancer cell line from the Department of Radiation Oncology , University of Glasgow .
The HMECs were grown in __MGEM__ supplemented with __MGEM__ , epidermal growth factor , insulin , GA-1000 and hydrocortisone .
The MCF-12A cells were grown in a 1 : 1 mixture of Dulbecco 's modified Eagle 's medium and Ham 's F12 medium , supplemented with 5% foetal calf serum , 20 ng ml-1 epidermal growth factor , 100 ng ml-1 cholera toxin , 0.01 mg ml-1 bovine insulin and 500 ng ml-1 hydrocortisone .
The MCF-7 cells were grown in RPMI medium with 10% foetal calf serum .
Biopsies
Archival breast biopsies stored in liquid nitrogen and held by the Department of Surgery , Western Infirmary , Glasgow , were used for this study .
These biopsies came from patients with potentially curable , invasive ductal adenocarcinomas who had given permission for the storage and future analysis of samples of tissue .
All studies were undertaken with the approval of the local NHS ethics committee .
RNA extraction , DNase treatment and cDNA synthesis
RNA extraction was performed using TRIzolÒ ( Life Technologies , UK ) on both the mammary epithelial cells and biopsies .
Breast glandular tissue was carefully dissected free from surrounding fatty tissue .
TRIzolÒ ( 1 ml ) was added per 50 mg of tissue .
Tissue was then homogenised using a mechanical tissue homogenizer at 0°C .
RNA was DNase treated with a commercially available kit ( Ambion , UK ) according to the manufacturer 's recommendations .
Then , 2 mug of RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using the SuperscriptÔ First Strand Synthesis System ( Invitrogen ) .
TaqmanÒ __PCR__
TaqmanÒ __PCR__ was carried out on duplicate cDNA samples using an ABI Prism 7700 sequence detector in a 25 mul reaction .
The mixture consisted of 20 ng of cDNA , 300 nM of each forward and reverse primer , 200 nM TaqmanÒ probe , 12.5 mul of TaqmanÒ Universal __PCR__ Master Mix ( Eurogentech , UK ) and H2O .
Cycle conditions were 50°C for 2 min , 95°C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min .
Sequences of forward and reverse primers and probes used are shown below .
Senescence-associated beta-galactosidase assay
The senescence-associated-beta-galactosidase ( SA-beta-Gal ) assay detects the presence of SA-beta-Gal , specifically at pH 6 , as an established histochemical marker of cellular senescence .
An assessment of the level of SA-beta-Gal expression in all cultures was therefore determined at pH 6 following the method of Dimri_et_al , with a pH 4 positive control included in all instances .
Statistical analysis
The __ANOVA__ was used to determine whether changes in sirtuin expression with replicative ageing were significant .
The comparative DeltaDeltaCT method was employed to quantify relative gene expression for the TaqmanÒ studies .
Analysis of individual gene expression between each of biopsy groups ( i.e. , normal , and node-positive and negative-breast biopsies ) was performed using __ANOVA__ .
Post hoc comparisons were performed using the independent Student 's t-test .
Differences in gene expression between the biopsy groups were calculated along with the 95% __CI__ .
Results are presented in figures displaying mean relative gene expression and the standard error of the mean .
RESULTS
Sirtuin gene expression in primary and immortalised cells was observed for change over time in culture .
Transcriptional expression for Sirtuins 1 , 2 , 3 and 7 was undertaken in serially passaged primary breast cells ( HMECs ) and in immortalised nontumorigenic ( MCF-12A ) and tumorigenic ( MCF-7 ) mammary epithelial cell lines .
This was performed with a view to determining the transcriptional profile of sirtuins as a function of time spent in culture and hence biological ageing .
SIRT3 and SIRT7 demonstrated an increase in transcriptional expression with increasing passage in HMECs .
This observation was not repeated for SIRT1 and SIRT2 , nor did any sirtuin analysed showed a change in transcriptional expression in either of the immortalised cell lines .
The increase in SIRT3 and SIRT7 expression was concurrent with an increase in SA-beta-Gal expression in the culture with increasing passage , indicating the presence of increasing amounts of senescent cells in the population .
Neither of the immortalised cell lines displayed a similar increase in SA-beta-Gal expression .
The acquisition of the senescent phenotype by the HMECs in association with serial passage was confirmed by a transcriptional analysis of the cellular stress and senescence genes p16INK4a and p21CIP1 .
The expression of p16INK4a increased with serial passage only in the primary cell line , as did expression for p21CIP1 , indicating that the transcriptional expression data for the sirtuins was associated with the generation of a senescent state in these cells .
Biopsies
The pathological characteristics of the breast biopsies used in this study were selected to include equal distribution by nodal status ( 12 lymph node positive and 12 lymph node negative ) , and tumour grade .
A total of 24 breast cancer samples were chosen and matched with 21 normal , nonmalignant breast tissue biopsies from the breasts of cancer patients .
These were then assessed for sirtuin expression levels .
Relative SIRT7 gene expression was significantly greater in biopsies from breast cancers compared to normal , nonmalignant breast tissue ( 1.74 ( 95% __CI__ 1.37-2.10 ) , P<0.001 , Figure 4 ) .
The relative expression of SIRT7 was also significantly higher in node-positive compared to node-negative cancers ( 1.96 , ( 95% __CI__ 1.54-2.38 ) vs 1.52 ( 95% __CI__ 1.13-1.90 ) , P<0.001 , Figure 5 ) .
No significant differences in SIRT1 , SIRT2 and SIRT3 gene expression were observed in a simple comparison of biopsies from breast cancers with normal breast tissue ( data not shown ) .
However , analogous to SIRT7 expression , SIRT3 expression was also significantly higher in lymph node-positive breast cancer biopsies when compared to normal breast biopsies ( 1.56 , 95% C.I. 1.10-2.01 , P<0.05 ) .
Sirtuin expression was similarly compared by grade , oestrogen receptor status and the presence of lymphovascular invasion in both node-positive and node-negative cancers .
No significant differences in sirtuin expression were seen using these factors ( data not shown ) .
DISCUSSION
We undertook this study to assess the possible association of changes in the transcriptional expression of individual sirtuin genes with breast cancer .
Firstly , we investigated sirtuin gene expression in both primary and immortalised cells with a view to determining how cellular ageing and immortalisation influenced their transcription profile .
Consequently , we observed SIRT3 and SIRT7 transcription to increase in primary cells as they approach senescence , concurrent with an increase in p16INK4a and p21CIP1 expression and the accumulation of SA-beta-Gal-containing cells .
Secondly , we demonstrated a significant in vivo association between altered SIRT3 and SIRT7 transcription and malignant breast disease .
A link between the transcriptional expression of genes involved in biological ageing and cancer is pertinent .
Individual sirtuins are respondents to intracellular redox changes and cell stress and hence biological ageing .
In yeast , __SIR2__ provides a functional link between the telomere and ribosomal DNA cluster integrity , thus impacting on ribosome production and enabling the cell to respond to stress induced redox state changes in the mitochondrion .
Consequently , damage responses in the cell can be modulated to match the degree of insult .
In man , individual sirtuins may provide separate functional components of this process .
This is intriguing , in the light of the observations that SIRT7 localises to the nucleolus and SIRT3 localises to the mitochondrion .
These subcellular locations , along with the telomere nucleoprotein complex , provide the components of a functional trinity , we have termed the MTR , that senses , assesses and signals damage .
Our observations that SIRT3 and SIRT7 expression is increased as primary mammary epithelial cells approach senescence and are also increased in node-positive breast cancer is in keeping with the MTR hypothesis .
As SIRT7 expression is invariably elevated in thyroid cancer cell lines and biopsies , increased expression of SIRT7 may represent an important step in malignant transformation .
Indeed , SIRT7 has recently been shown to activate Pol I encouraging growth and proliferation .
In this study , we have shown that increased SIRT7 expression is also observed in breast cancer , and may therefore be postulated , in a similar manner , to be required for malignant transformation .
Furthermore , SIRT7 expression is also associated with nodal invasion and therefore locally aggressive disease .
Whether this increased expression contributes to the increased proliferative potential of mammary cancer cells or reflects a molecular change necessary for breast cancer tumorigenesis is undetermined .
Alternatively , it may reflect a compensatory mechanism as a consequence of the increased proliferative state .
This is supported by observations on the activity of the yeast sirtuin orthologue , __SIR2__ .
Nucleolar __SIR2__ activity is a limiting factor for determining when the cell undergoes senescence .
The high proliferative rate in many tumours often results in them having shortened telomeres as a consequence of rapid cell turnover outstripping telomerase-mediated telomere repair .
This may , in analogy with the situation in yeast , lead to an upregulation of sirtuin activity in an attempt to stabilise the nucleolus .
The increased SIRT3 and SIRT7 transcription in primary mammary epithelial cells , as a consequence of increased oxidant load with in vitro growth , is supportive of such a scenario .
The association of elevated SIRT7 expression in node-positive tumours , which have a greater recurrence and poorer survival , suggests that this gene may prove to be a good marker of disease progression and tumour behaviour .
There was no overall difference observed in SIRT3 expression between breast cancer and normal breast tissue .
However , on subdividing the cancer biopsies by nodal status , SIRT3 expression , like that of SIRT7 , was greater in node-positive breast cancer compared to normal breast tissue .
SIRT3 has been shown to specifically targeted and converted into its active form within the mitochondria .
Cumulative mitochondrial damage contributes to a fall in relative __NAD__ levels , and concomitant fall in SIRT3 activity , and is associated with growth arrest , senescence and apoptosis .
Analogous to SIRT1 and SIRT2 , SIRT3 may also function to provide a growth and survival advantage .
Indeed , variability of the SIRT3 gene has been linked to survival in the elderly .
The increased expression of SIRT3 seen in lymph node-positive tumours may , therefore , contribute to survival of these more aggressive tumours .
Our data showed that the expression of SIRT1 did not differ between normal and malignant breast biopsies .
This suggests that transcriptional changes for SIRT1 may not be implicated in breast cancer pathogenesis .
This observation may be pertinent to the p53 status of breast cancers , as p53 is a substrate for SIRT1 .
Unlike the upregulation of telomerase , abnormalities in p53 are seen in only 20-40% of breast cancers , suggesting that disruption of p53 pathways may be of lesser importance in breast cancer pathogenesis .
These data do not , however , negate a role for SIRT1 in breast cancer pathogenesis , as we looked at overall sirtuin transcriptional expression levels and not at any putative post-transcriptional regulation .
The lack of transcriptional change observed for SIRT2 in this study may be a reflection of a cell cycle dependency in its expression .
It may be that more dynamic evaluation of changes in SIRT2 expression at specific stages of the cell cycle may reveal abnormal patterns of SIRT2 expression in breast cancer .
The clinical significance of the differences we have observed in sirtuin expression needs further investigation .
Our study has indicated the potential utility of sirtuins as prognostic markers in breast cancer .
The observation that SIRT7 is increased in breast cancer tissue compared to normal breast tissue suggests that it may be related to breast cancer tumorigenesis .
The discovery of a greater expression of SIRT3 and SIRT7 , within the prognostically poorer lymph node-positive breast cancers , suggests that overexpression of these sirtuins may be related to dissemination .
In summary , the heterogeneity of breast cancer behaviour is paralleled and may be explained by sirtuin expression .
Specifically , molecular changes in SIRT3 and SIRT7 expression may contribute to tumour development and disease progression .
This study shows that the study of sirtuins has a potential application in breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis , as well as in understanding disease biology .
