Introduction
The history of endocrine therapy for breast cancer dates back more than a century ago when the Glasgow surgeon Sir George Beatson performed the first oophorectomy for a patient with advanced breast cancer resulting in a dramatic response.1 The second patient Beatson treated by oophorectomy failed to respond and in today 's terminology progressed de novo .
For Beatson it was a matter of carrying out an oophorectomy and then waiting to see if the tumour responded .
He had no knowledge about the presence of the oestrogen receptor ( ER ) , which in fact was reported over 70 years later.2 It has since remained the most important factor in selecting patients for endocrine therapy , in all stages of breast cancer .
Prior to the introduction of various pharmacological agents , endocrine therapy for breast cancer was essentially ablative to remove sources of oestrogen by either surgery ( e.g. oophorectomy , adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy ) or radiotherapy ( i.e. to the ovaries ) .
Oophorectomy ( e.g. b__LHRH__ analogues ) .
Adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy are seldom carried out for obvious reasons and are now largely of historical interest .
Surgical oophorectomy and ovarian irradiation are simple and may be cost-effective but both are irreversible .
In contrast pharmacological manipulation can achieve a reversible blockade of ovarian function and for non-responders who can be identified later in the course of therapy , an ablative procedure could have been avoided .
Tamoxifen , since its introduction into clinical practice in 1971 , has revolutionised the use of endocrine therapy for breast cancer.3 Until recently , it has been the standard agent for adjuvant endocrine therapy for primary breast cancer , as well as the recommended first line endocrine therapy agent for advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women .
Its role in preventing breast cancer is also being evaluated .
It remains the standard against which new agents are compared .
Other conventional as well as new agents will be discussed .
As will be described , some of these new agents are now challenging the gold standard role of tamoxifen .
The role of endocrine therapy for breast cancer has been well established and most studied in the context of metastatic disease when hormonal manipulation is used on its own as a systemic therapy .
Another clinical setting is where endocrine therapy has been used as the sole therapy for primary disease in elderly and / or frail patients unfit for surgery .
Under these circumstances the tumour remains in vivo as a marker of response and the precise role of endocrine therapy can be delineated .
Endocrine therapy is also now widely used in the adjuvant setting after primary treatment of early operable breast cancer .
This indication is different from the first two in that with adjuvant therapy there is no visible / measurable disease and therefore the response to adjuvant endocrine agents cannot be determined on an individual patient basis .
Ongoing studies are also investigating its use as a preoperative / neoadjuvant therapy as well as a preventative therapy for early primary breast cancer .
Endocrine therapy versus chemotherapy
When compared with chemotherapy , endocrine therapy gives rise to less troublesome side effects .
The therapeutic action of conventional endocrine therapy agents is slower than for chemotherapeutic agents .
However , once a response to endocrine therapy has been achieved it tends to be more sustained and to produce greater survival benefit .
On the other hand , at least in the advanced setting , the two kinds of therapy tend to be used to treat different groups of patients and this selection bias would affect the interpretation of the survival difference .
Endocrine therapy is most useful for ER-positive tumours , which metastasise more frequently to soft tissue sites ( e.g. skin ) , bone and pleura .
Chemotherapy is generally considered in cases of rapidly progressing disease and / or potentially life-threatening situations ( e.g. lymphangitis carcinomatosa and extensive liver metastases ) , as well as when the disease is deemed hormone insensitive ( e.g .
ER negative tumour or tumour , which has developed de novo hormone resistance ( see below ) ) .
In the adjuvant setting , chemotherapy is used to produce additive survival advantage for patients with ER-positive tumours receiving endocrine therapy .
The key differences between the two therapies are summarised in Table 1.
Mechanisms of action and modalities of therapy
Today ER remains the strongest predictor of response to endocrine therapy .
It is a 65-kDa oestrogen-binding protein expressed by 46 - 77% of breast cancers. The proportion of ER-positive tumours also increases with advancing age.12 We have recently reviewed over 1500 elderly ( >70 years ) patients with primary breast cancer and found that > 80% were ER positive.13 Up to 60% of ER-positive tumours respond to endocrine therapy while a response can be seen in about 10% of ER negative tumours. However , it is thought that such a high percentage could be due to the old ligand binding rather than immunohistochemical assay .
Until the recent discovery of the ER-ß which may play a role in the development of acquired hormone resistance,16 the well-known ER , now known as ER-greek small letter alpha , has been extensively studied .
Within the ER-greek small letter alpha , there are two activating functions ( AF1 and AF2 ) which could be activated by oestradiol ( E2 ) thereby stimulating the transcription of the target genes which in turn could lead to proliferation of the tumour .
__SERMs__ ( e.g. tamoxifen ) are ER ligands that in some tissues act like oestrogens , but block oestrogen action in others .
Different ER ligands induce distinct structural changes in the receptor that influence its ability to interact with other proteins ( e.g. co-activators or co-repressors ) critical for the regulation of target gene transcription.17 Moreover , the receptor can be activated by growth factors ( e.g. epidermal growth factor ) , by intracellular mediators such as cyclic AMP and by phorbol esters acting via protein kinases A and C , respectively.18 There are therefore at least two ways that an endocrine therapy can act on an ER-positive tumour viz firstly , by acting on the receptor itself ; and secondly , by depriving the receptor from circulating oestrogen .
The production of oestrogen is via the aromatase system , which controls both the conversion of testosterone to E2 directly and also the conversion of androstenedione to oestrone ( E1 ) , which is ultimately converted by 17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase to E2 .
In premenopausal women most aromatase activity is ovarian and is regulated in the granulosa cells .
Therefore the main source of oestrogens is the ovaries .
In contrast , in postmenopausal women , ovarian granulosa cells cease to function and most aromatase activity occurs in non-ovarian tissues e.g. fat , liver , muscle and hair follicles .
Furthermore , androstenedione and also testosterone to a minor extent , the substrates for aromatase , are produced mainly in the adrenals ( and negligibly in the residual ovarian thecal tissue ) .
Evaluation of therapeutic agents
Conventionally assessment of response to any systemic therapy for breast cancer is based on criteria laid down by the International __UICC__ 19 with adherence to the British Breast Group recommendation that any useful response should be of a minimum duration of 6 months.20 According to __UICC__ criteria , therapeutic response can be classified into four categories viz __UICC__ , __UICC__ , __UICC__ and __UICC__ , the definitions of which are summarised in Table 2. Recently , the __UICC__ using uni- rather than bi-dimensional measurements have been introduced as another system of assessment.21 Regardless lesions may be classified as measurable ( i.e. where the lesion can be measured ) or evaluable ( e.g. a lytic metastasis which has caused disappearance of a rib ) .
It should be noted that some lesions ( e.g. ascites , pleural effusion , sclerotic bony metastases , and irradiated lesions ) are not evaluable for response to systemic therapy .
These lesions can account for 10 - 40% of all metastases at initial diagnosis of metastatic disease.22 In those instances biochemical assessment by serum tumour markers is the only validated method recommended by the __ASCO__ 23 and also in the Guidelines for the Management of Metastatic Bone Disease in Breast Cancer in the UK.
The median survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer is between 2 and 3 years from the time of symptomatic presentation .
Metastatic disease is incurable and the aim of treatment is palliative and maximising the quality of life .
Survival can be prolonged in those who respond to systemic therapy and long-term responders are almost invariably patients who have endocrine sensitive tumours .
While the rate of response is of importance in evaluating an endocrine agent , it should be remembered that , as mentioned , the duration of response ( DoR ) should be at least 6 months .
Any short-lived response of a lesser duration seldom translates into a survival advantage .
When looking at response rates , it has been noted that __PD__ and non-progression ( CR+PR+SD ) rather than responders ( CR+PR ) and non-responders ( SD+PD ) .
Patients who have achieved __SD__ at 6 months have the same survival as those who have __CR__ or __PR__ at 6 months .
It is only the group of patients with PD at 6 months who will have a poorer survival .
This finding has been confirmed for first , second , and third line endocrine therapies. Furthermore , the clinical value of durable __SD__ has been confirmed for three different classes of endocrine agents i.e. anti-oestrogens ( tamoxifen ) , aromatase inhibitors ( aminoglutethimide , anastrozole ) and progestogens ( megestrol acetate ) . It is therefore recommended that an endocrine agent be continued until there is definite evidence of PD .
Patients and clinicians can both be reassured that patients with __SD__ are benefiting to a similar extent in terms of survival as patients who achieve __CR__ or __PR__ .
These findings emphasise the relative importance of endocrine therapies for patients with metastatic breast cancer in that significantly more patients than previously acknowledged appear to benefit .
The rates of non-progression or clinical benefit ( CB=CR+PR+SD ) can reach 72% and 53% in first and second line endocrine therapies , with 40% and 42% being SDs , respectively , using the conventional agents tamoxifen and megestrol acetate.31 In fact , in most recent randomised trials on endocrine therapy , patients have been grouped with data analysed in this fashion.
The DoR is an important parameter in endocrine therapy as the actual remission or CB rate ( i.e. CR+PR+SD ) since it determines how long a patient 's disease is controlled .
At the time of PD , a change of therapy would mean an adaptation to a new therapy ( e.g. due to side effects , renewed uncertainty as to whether the cancer will respond again and for how long ; overall the DoR to second line endocrine therapy is often shorter than for first line endocrine therapy ) .
For instance , the median duration of tamoxifen as first line therapy is 19 months while , after failing tamoxifen , the duration would be reduced to 15 months with second line therapy using megestrol acetate.31 However for individual patients , there is no correlation between time to progression or DoR on first line and then second line endocrine therapy .
The time required to achieve the best response and the quality of the response ( e.g. __CR__ rather than __PR__ , __CR__ / __PR__ rather than __SD__ ) are particularly important when endocrine therapy is used as a preoperative or neoadjuvant therapy ( e.g. to achieve down staging ) for primary breast cancer.36
Last but not the least , the side effect profile needs to be considered when evaluating an endocrine therapy agent .
Not only the short-term side effects are of concern , long-term problems are important .
The latter may be more relevant in patients receiving adjuvant therapy than patients being treated for metastatic disease .
When treating patients with metastatic breast cancer , the quality-of-life issue is vital since all of them will eventually die from the disease and excessive side effects which outweigh the benefits of a particular systemic therapy are not acceptable ( e.g. anastrozole produces less weight gain than megestrol acetate and initially on this basis alone replaced it as a second line endocrine therapy ; subsequent analyses also confirmed a therapeutic advantage ( i.e. increased survival ) ) .
In the adjuvant as well as the potential preventative settings , endocrine therapy needs to be continued for a long duration in women with a longer life expectancy than in those with metastatic disease .
The late sequel of such therapies ( e.g. effect of oophorectomy , tamoxifen on bone , endometrium and lipid profile ) must be borne in mind .
Therapeutic strategies
As mentioned earlier , in premenopausal women the main source of oestrogen is the ovary .
The use of an oestrogen antagonist to block the binding of oestrogen to the ER may , at least theoretically , lead to a rebound increase in E2 concentration , which might in turn result in subsequent stimulation of tumour growth .
Therefore , the initial strategy when dealing with an ER-positive tumour in premenopausal women is to produce an artificial menopause by ovarian ablation .
This can be achieved by irreversible ablative procedures such as oophorectomy or ovarian irradiation , or by pharmacological manipulation using an __LHRH__ agonist ( e.g. goserelin ) to produce a potentially reversible menopausal state .
The reversibility of agents such as goserelin appears to be related to the age of the patient at the initiation of treatment and also the duration of goserelin therapy .
On the other hand , tamoxifen alone works in both premenopausal and postmenopausal women .
Tamoxifen therefore could be used as a first line endocrine therapy in premenopausal women before ovarian function suppression is employed .
Traditionally , major classes of endocrine agents include ( i ) tamoxifen and other __SERMs__ , ( ii ) progestogens , ( iii ) aromatase inhibitors , and recently ( iv ) the pure anti-oestrogen .
These agents will be discussed according to their historical development of clinical use .
Tamoxifen has both oestrogen agonistic and antagonistic properties .
The anti-oestrogenic effect inhibits the proliferation of breast cancer cells .
The agonistic nature produces beneficial ( e.g. on bone metabolism and lipid profiles ) and detrimental ( e.g. on the endometrium resulting in increased risk of hyperplasia and carcinoma when used for prolonged period ) effects .
Before the introduction of third generation selective aromatase inhibitors such as anastrozole , tamoxifen was the standard first line endocrine therapy for treating ER-positive advanced breast cancer in postmenopausal women .
Megestrol acetate , a progestogen , was the second line therapy of choice , followed by aminoglutethimide , a non-selective aromatase inhibitor , as third line therapy .
Tamoxifen , megestrol acetate and aminoglutethimide have been reported to have comparable efficacies although on closer inspection none of these randomised trials were ever powered to show therapeutic equivalence .
The reason why they have been used in such cascade over the last 10 - 15 years is mainly because of differences in the side effect profiles of the drugs .
Tamoxifen , despite the problems mentioned above ( e.g. on the endometrium ) , has minimal side effects and is one of the most tolerable agents available for clinical use to date .
Nonetheless tamoxifen appears to be associated with slightly higher risk of thromboembolism when compared to anastrozole , as initially shown in the __TARGET__ Study41 and tamoxifen remains effective after failing anastrozole when used as a first line therapy in the study.42 Megestrol acetate produces significant weight gain ( >10% ) in over 20% of patients.43 Aminoglutethimide is a non-selective aromatase inhibitor and generally needs to be given with hydrocortisone .
Side effects include skin rashes , lethargy , etc.
Randomised studies have demonstrated superiority of the third generation selective aromatase inhibitors over megestrol acetate in terms of efficacy , side effect profile and even survival when used as a second line therapy. Anastrozole , a non-steroidal agent of this group has since replaced megestrol acetate as the second line therapy of choice due to a significant survival advantage. The steroidal selective aromatase inhibitor exemestane has also reported to show a survival advantage and been launched for clinical use.43 Studies have also suggested that there is no cross resistance between exemestane , the new steroidal aromatase inhibitor and the non-steroidal selective aromatase inhibitors.44 It would therefore appear that a response to exemestane might still be attained in patients who failed to respond to anastrozole or letrozole , for instance .
The opposite scenario has also recently been found to be true in that patients who received exemestane as their first aromatase inhibitor were found to benefit from anastrozole or letrozole after progression.45 As will be described later , this would be of relevance as these selective aromatase inhibitors have now been shown to be excellent options as adjuvant endocrine therapy implying that they would often be used as the first endocrine agent .
Owing to these developments , megestrol acetate has been moved down in the cascade as a third line agent .
Aminoglutethimide is now rarely used in clinical practice .
Recent data from prospective randomised trials comparing anastrozole, letrozole and exemestane50 with tamoxifen have suggested that these new third generation aromatase inhibitors are replacing tamoxifen as a longstanding gold standard therapy for postmenopausal advanced breast cancer .
They were shown to have better or equivalent efficacy and better side effect profile than tamoxifen .
There have since been randomised trials comparing the pure anti-oestrogen fulvestrant , an ER down-regulator with novel mechanism of action , with tamoxifen as first line and with the selective aromatase inhibitor anastrozole as second line therapies for advanced breast cancer .
As a second line therapy , fulvestrant appears to be as effective as anastrozole with a non-significant numerical increase in objective response rates in favour of fulvestrant. Fulvestrant has now been licensed for use in this setting and it is the first and only pure anti-oestrogen , which has reached the clinic .
Experience has shown that fulvestrant works after a prior aromatase inhibitor and response to further endocrine agents can occur with prior fulvestrant when used as first to ninth line endocrine therapy.54
Generally an endocrine therapy is used until the disease progresses ( PD ) and then another endocrine agent is introduced strategically as described i.e. in a sequential manner .
The combination use of multiple endocrine therapy agents has not been shown to be superior and might even exacerbate side effects. The only combination which has been widely studied and reported to have beneficial effects is the use of an __LHRH__ agonist and tamoxifen in premenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer. While the CHAT meta-analysis has shown that the combination is better than using an __LHRH__ agonist alone , it did not compare whether concurrent therapy with goserelin and tamoxifen was superior to the same agents given sequentially .
Indeed the only study in the CHAT meta-analysis which did have the data to make this comparison showed no difference in the clinical outcome .
Recent small studies also showed promising results when goserelin and anastrozole were combined in premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer , as a first line therapy ( with 60 - 72% chance of CB up to 20+ months ) or after failing goserelin plus tamoxifen ( with 75% CB rate for 17+ months ) .65 However , further studies involving larger number of patients with longer term follow-up are required to substantiate these initial findings .
Adjuvant therapy
The use of adjuvant systemic therapies has been shown to improve survival of patients with primary breast cancer ( i.e. ovarian ablation,66 tamoxifen67 and chemotherapy ) and specifically the role of endocrine therapy in this situation is well established .
Whenever adjuvant systemic therapy is indicated ( e.g. in node positive disease ) , ER is the single most important factor to date for selecting patients for endocrine therapy rather than for chemotherapy .
The benefit of endocrine therapy alone in patients with ER-positive tumours has been reported to be either equivalent to or greater than that achieved by using chemotherapy alone.
Premenopausal women
Ovarian ablation , mainly in the form of ablative procedures ( e.g. oophorectomy , ovarian irradiation ) in the early days , has been shown by randomised trials to produce survival benefits in premenopausal women with ER-positive tumours regardless of whether additional adjuvant chemotherapy was given .
__CMF__ ) i.e. the ZEBRA trial has randomised 1640 premenopausal patients with primary breast cancer into two groups receiving either goserelin for 2 years ( N=817 ) or __CMF__ for 6 cycles ( N=823 ) as adjuvant systemic therapy .
Among patients with ER-positive tumours ( 72% of all patients randomised ) both treatments have been shown to be equivalent in terms of disease free survival. Furthermore , the overall quality of life scores were better in the group treated with goserelin .
The bone mineral density decreased in both groups but subsequent recovery was seen only in the group receiving goserelin .
A recently presented overview of over 6000 ER-positive patients from 13 randomised trials has demonstrated that the addition of an __LHRH__ agonist to adjuvant chemotherapy significantly reduced the rate of cancer recurrence , although deaths from breast cancer reduced less and were not significant.78
Pre- and post-menopausal women
For both pre- and postmenopausal women , tamoxifen has been the gold standard until recently when its role is being challenged by the third generation , selective aromatase inhibitors , which however only work in women after menopause .
Tamoxifen , for a duration of 5 years , produces at least 30 - 40% of risk reduction of relapse at 10 years while there is a mortality reduction of approximately 25%.67 It is generally well tolerated with excellent side effect profile and clinical experience for more than three decades .
Postmenopausal women
Several major randomised trials have now been completed showing superiority of third generation aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen in different settings of giving adjuvant endocrine therapy for postmenopausal women with hormone sensitive early breast cancer and the design of these trials is summarised in Fig. 4 :
- Upfront use of aromatase inhibitors : It is known that the peak of breast cancer recurrence is in the first 2 years following surgery , followed by another smaller peak beyond 5 years .79 This supports the rationale of giving the most efficacious endocrine therapy upfront , as all other approaches will have excluded the patients who have already recurred prior .
The superiority of selective aromatase inhibitors over tamoxifen was first noted in the __ATAC__ trial , the largest ever randomised endocrine therapy study , which , at 68 months follow-up , revealed a significantly longer disease free survival when anastrozole was compared directly with tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy in postmenopausal women.80 No advantage was seen in the combination arm .
In terms of adverse events , anastrozole is associated with statistically significantly less cerebrovascular events , venous thromboembolism , vaginal symptoms , hot flushes and endometrial carcinoma but more musculoskeletal problems including fractures .
This could be accounted for by its effect of oestrogen deprivation while tamoxifen , being an anti-oestrogen on the ER , also has oestrogen agonist property on the bones and endometrium .
Letrozole , another aromatase inhibitor given upfront as adjuvant endocrine therapy in postmenopausal women with early breast cancer , has also been shown to be superior to tamoxifen , in terms of disease free survival and risk of distant metastases , in a randomised trial , as reported at 25.8 and 51 months of follow-up. Similar increase in musculoskeletal events as seen with anastrozole has also been observed .
In addition , letrozole also appears to be associated with higher incidence of cardiac events and hypercholesterolaemia .
- Sequential use of aromatase inhibitors : Randomised trials have also been done to look at a sequential approach by a prospectively planned treatment with tamoxifen ( for the initial 2 - 3 years ) followed by another 2 - 3 years of an aromatase inhibitor .
This approach has not yet been shown to be superior to taking 5 years of tamoxifen , although for patients who have already taken 2 - 3 years of tamoxifen , switching to an aromatase inhibitor has been shown to be superior.83
__NCIC__ MA-17 trial , __NCIC__ trial , and __NCIC__ ) have looked into switching tamoxifen to an aromatase inhibitor ( at the end of 2 - 3 years ( 'switch ) or 5 years ( extended adjuvant ) ) and again shown superiority of the latter in terms of disease free survival and incidence of contra lateral breast cancer , though the patient groups and design are different in these trials. Exemestane has also been shown to produce benefit as extended adjuvant endocrine therapy similar to the extent seen with letrozole.87
As a result of these trials , licensed indications have now changed for these aromatase inhibitors .
Anastrozole and letrozole can now be used upfront .
Exemestane and anastrozole can be used as a switch therapy following 2 - 3 years of tamoxifen .
Letrozole is licensed also for extended use following 5 years of tamoxifen .
Other issues
While it is envisaged that aromatase inhibitors will become the adjuvant endocrine therapy of choice , overall survival data are awaited from all these trials ( though it is unlikely the superior outcome would change as studies like the __ATAC__ are huge and statistically powered to show a benefit early ) , and potential long-term problems need to be addressed .
For example , there has been concern on cognitive function impairment , which could be significant for these patients with potentially curable early breast cancer.88 Increased cardiac events have been observed with letrozole and exemestane. Effort is also being made to tackle the side effects on the bones ( e.g. fractures ) .
Trials are ongoing to investigate the use of bisphosphonates ( e.g. zoledronic acid ) in this setting , suggesting the potential benefit of early prophylactic use of bisphosphonates in patients receiving an adjuvant aromatase inhibitor.89 Certainly , this approach would be costly and health economics studies are being carried out .
While aromatase inhibitors have not been shown to produce any benefit on ER-negative tumours , within the ER-positive subgroup , there are data suggesting that they may work best in those which are HER2 positive and / or progesterone receptor ( PgR ) negative. The degree of benefit is more comparable to that of tamoxifen if the tumour is ER positive , HER2 negative and PgR positive .
Nonetheless there is criticism that the observation was either retrospective or based on small subgroups only .
No such correlation was seen in the subgroup analysis with letrozole in the large BIG1-98 study.81
Tamoxifen produces survival benefits not only in postmenopausal women , but also in women less than 50 years of age.67 Trial results have suggested that a 5 year duration of tamoxifen is better than tamoxifen for 2 years .
Whether there is significant benefit when tamoxifen is given for over 5 years remains to be elucidated bearing in mind that the risk of endometrial carcinoma increases with its prolonged use.67 This question is the subject of two studies - ATLAS and ATTOM .
Nonetheless , given the new data showing superiority of aromatase inhibitors , the relevance of the outcome of these trials would diminish .
It would therefore appear that , based on currently available data , the adjuvant systemic therapies of choice in case of an ER-positive tumour are ovarian ablation and tamoxifen in premenopausal women .
In postmenopausal women , it is now generally accepted that they should be exposed to an aromatase inhibitor at some stage of endocrine therapy .
The advantage of giving it upfront would be to reduce the risk of recurrence , which is most significant in the first 2 - 3 years when the 'switch approach cannot address .
The 'switch approach may however be more cost-effective when monitoring of bone mineral density and treatment of osteopenia are taken into account .
For women who are reaching the end of 5 years of tamoxifen , an extension to letrozole , especially in the node positive group where significant overall survival benefit was seen in the MA-17 trial,84 should be considered .
Addition of chemotherapy in these patients with ER-positive tumours offers only modest absolute benefits , which tends to diminish with age .
It should thus be considered in premenopausal women ( and perhaps the younger postmenopausal women ) with a poor prognostic tumour .
Although the aromatase inhibitors have recently revolutionised the use of adjuvant endocrine therapy , little was known about women 's experience of and knowledge about the therapy and their understanding of the risk of recurrence .
Initial work from the GAEA ( the Greek Goddess of the earth - Gathering information on Adjuvant Endocrine therApy ) Initiative , a collaboration between several organisations in Europe , suggests that the informational needs from most women were not met and that there was a difference according to age. Findings from a large-scale survey from the GAEA Initiative are being used to raise awareness of issues surrounding adjuvant endocrine therapy .
Preoperative therapy
Experimental studies based on animal models demonstrated that the size of a metastasis would increase after treatment of the primary tumour by either surgical removal or irradiation.94 The process was thought to be mediated by some serum growth factors .
It was suggested that prior treatment with chemotherapy or tamoxifen might suppress this effect.95 Systemic therapy for a primary cancer before its removal also allows assessment of therapeutic response and hence better targeting of later therapy after surgery .
Pre-surgical studies with various endocrine therapy agents ( e.g. tamoxifen , the pure anti-oestrogen ICI 182,780 and the SERM raloxifene ) have reported anti-tumour effects ( e.g. down-regulation of ER ) , which could be observed soon ( in terms of weeks ) after exposure to these agents. Preoperative systemic therapy therefore does not only have the potential of down staging a primary breast cancer ( which is generally accepted by clinicians ) , but might also have survival advantage over conventional way of administering such therapy in the adjuvant setting i.e. after the primary treatment which is usually in the form of surgery with or without radiotherapy ( based on the above mentioned experimental and preclinical studies thus far ) .
A recent review has reported that in patients with ER-positive tumours , a response approaching 70% could be reached in approximately 3 months.36 On the other hand , it is worth noting that such response rates were predominantly associated with tamoxifen rather than the newer agents such as the third generation aromatase inhibitors .
Preoperative endocrine therapy has advantages over neoadjuvant chemotherapy in having less side effects and in the fact that it can be continued throughout the perioperative period .
As shown in the adjuvant studies , aromatase inhibitors would be associated with less worries in terms of perioperative thromboembolic risk when compared to tamoxifen .
However , it should be noted that in up to 30% of patients the tumour will progress and potentially these patients might be placed at a disadvantage by a neoadjuvant therapy approach .
Further studies are now required to identify factors , in addition to ER , to precisely predict response and to select patients who would most benefit from this therapeutic approach .
The optimum duration of therapy needs to be defined .
The existing methods of monitoring response have to be improved since a much earlier response ( rather than 6 months ) is expected .
Incorporation of immunohistochemical and immunocytochemical techniques to measure tissue tumour markers might improve the monitoring as well as the earlier identification of non-responders to whom alternative therapies can be offered .
While most currently available studies on preoperative endocrine therapy employed tamoxifen as the agent of choice , promising results have been shown in small studies on new agents. The new pure anti-oestrogens ( e.g .
Long-acting ICI 182,780 ( fulvestrant ) and third generation selective aromatase inhibitors ( e.g. anastrozole , letrozole ) appear to have potential advantages over tamoxifen since they have more rapid and profound inhibitory activities , few or no agonistic effects and low side effect profiles.101 They also have the potential in producing better quality of response ( __CR__ / __PR__ rather than __SD__ ) which is relevant to the setting of using a preoperative therapy ( e.g. for down staging ) .
This may explain the observed difference from tamoxifen in clinical studies .
A randomised double-blind study of four months of letrozole versus tamoxifen given preoperatively in 337 postmenopausal women with hormone receptor positive primary breast cancer showed a significantly higher response rate with letrozole ( 55% versus 36% in clinical CR+PR ) with minimal side effects.49 Letrozole is currently licensed for use in the preoperative setting .
In addition to the imminent need to identify the best endocrine therapy agents , trials should be designed to demonstrate the superiority of such therapeutic approach over conventional adjuvant systemic therapy .
Chemoprevention
With evidence that tamoxifen when used as adjuvant systemic therapy can reduce the incidence of contra lateral breast cancer,67 the potential role of using it to prevent breast cancer in well women has been investigated .
Results of four major randomised studies investigating the use of tamoxifen in preventing breast cancer have now been published. The conceptual idea of testing tamoxifen as a potential preventative agent originated from the investigators at the Royal Marsden Hospital , followed by other trials in America , Italy and worldwide .
The NSABP trial in the United States has demonstrated a significant reduction in the incidence of breast cancer in women taking tamoxifen when compared with women taking placebo.102 This has led to the approval of using tamoxifen for chemoprevention in the United States .
Despite differences in the design and recruitment , results of these four trials are consistent with a 30 - 40% reduction in incidence of breast cancer .
At 9 years of follow-up of the __IBIS__ I , the reduction of incidence of breast cancer in the tamoxifen arm has been shown to persist and become more marked.107 Thus , the effect of tamoxifen in preventing or delaying new breast cancers , at least in the short term for most moderately high risk women , is now established .
However , it must be noted that such effect has only been seen to cause reduction in ER-positive breast cancer .
Endocrine agents other than tamoxifen have also been investigated .
The SERM raloxifene has recently been found to be associated with a reduction in breast cancer incidence when used in women with the primary indication of preventing or delaying osteoporosis.8 Its potential role in chemoprevention is comparable with tamoxifen as __STAR__ in the United States although its effect in reducing ductal carcinoma in situ has been seen to be minimal when compared to tamoxifen , which has been shown to reduce the incidence of both invasive and in situ carcinoma.110
As mentioned earlier in the adjuvant trials , tamoxifen has also been shown , in these prevention trials , to be associated with increased risk of endometrial cancer and venous thromboembolism.105 These effects are even more important in the preventative setting when the drug is used in otherwise healthy women .
The encouraging superior efficacy and tolerability results of the __ATAC__ trial mentioned above have prompted the investigation of the aromatase inhibitors .
Contra lateral cancer incidence was found to be further reduced by anastrozole in the __ATAC__ trial.80 Similar observations have been seen with other aromatase inhibitors in the adjuvant trials .
However , there is significant increase in musculoskeletal disorders with anastrozole and other aromatase inhibitors when compared with tamoxifen .
The __IBIS__ II is ongoing comparing anastrozole with placebo in postmenopausal women at increased risk of breast cancer .
Male breast cancer
In general , men are regarded as postmenopausal when endocrine therapy is considered .
Back in 1942 , before the discovery of ER , the dramatic effect of orchidectomy on bony metastases was already known.111 Endocrine therapy appears to be ideal in treating male breast cancer which is mostly ER positive , when compared to the female counterpart .
A recent review of the literature112 has found previous reports of successful use of aminoglutethimide and tamoxifen. Obviously most patients find tamoxifen , which has now also been used in adjuvant setting more acceptable than orchidectomy , but the drug has more reported adverse effects ( such as decrease in libido , weight gain , deep vein thrombosis ) in men than in women , with a drop-out rate of about 20% in less than a year in one series.115
In men , the major source of the circulating oestrogen is derived from peripheral aromatisation of androgens and only a small amount comes from the testes.116 Given this the effectiveness of an aromatase inhibitor would be a logical assumption .
Early reports of their use in a metastatic setting are very encouraging.117 In Nottingham , we also have clinical experience in the use of the pure anti-oestrogen , fulvestrant , in treating metastatic breast cancer in males.118 Currently , there is no data for the use of aromatase inhibitors in the adjuvant setting .
The use of an __LHRH__ agonist is more established in males when prostate cancer is treated .
Little is known in male breast cancer .
An isolated case report describes its use in a patient with metastatic disease but it is difficult to ascertain its effectiveness as it was used in combination with an anti-androgen.119
Future development
Future development of endocrine therapy for breast cancer should aim at optimising current agents in areas where its role has already been established ( i.e. adjuvant therapy , treatment of advanced disease ) , and exploiting its use in potential areas ( i.e. preoperative therapy , chemoprevention ) as described .
There is another group of patients who need special attention .
Traditionally , the elderly patients with ER positive early operable primary breast cancer who are unfit for surgery would be treated by tamoxifen , as noted in a systematic review of the literature.36 Little however is known in using an aromatase inhibitor in this setting .
We have recently reported a 94% CB rate in a small series of such patients treated by anastrozole.120 Whilst surgery has been shown to be superior to primary tamoxifen in the elderly , whether this remains the case with the aromatase inhibitors will be the focus of a multicentre clinical trial ( ESTEeM ) in the UK .
With the availability of different endocrine agents , the concept of sequencing becomes important so that we can ensure optimal use of agents while maintaining hormone sensitivity to subsequent agents which might act via different mechanisms .
Traditionally , further endocrine therapy would only be considered when CB has been seen with a prior agent .
From a series of over 200 patients treated with endocrine therapy for advanced breast cancer , further endocrine response could still be seen in a significant proportion of patients who have developed de novo resistance to first line endocrine therapy ( i.e. PD within 6 months of treatment ) .121 The use of further endocrine therapy should not be excluded under this circumstance .
Detailed study of clinical and histopathological characteristics of these patients would be useful to help selection .
There is also a need for the development of new endocrine agents .
For example , pure anti-progestogens are a separate class of endocrine agents , which offer therapeutic opportunities .
The anti-progestogen onapristone produced a response rate comparable to tamoxifen as a first line therapy for primary breast cancer in a small pilot study122 but unfortunately its clinical development was stopped apparently due to transient liver function impairment associated with the drug .
However , both the preclinical data showing a different mode of action ( i.e. induction of apoptosis and terminal differentiation ) from that associated with anti-oestrogens123 and the pilot clinical results support future development of new generation PgR antagonists .
TAS-108 is the latest member in the anti-oestrogen family .
It is a novel steroidal compound which has a strong binding affinity to the ER .
It is a full ER-greek small letter alpha antagonist but seems to have some retained ER-ß activities , which suggests it may have beneficial effect to the bone and its clinical efficacy is being assessed in studies.124
While new agents are being developed , some old ideas are worth considering , which would help extending the number of endocrine agents available in some patients with tumour which remains hormone sensitive despite multiple lines of treatment .
Many studies have shown good clinical efficacy to high-dose oestrogens .
A randomised trial demonstrated higher ( though statistic__DES__ was compared with tamoxifen.125 We reported a CB rate of 30% with a mean DoR of 17+ months in 10 patients who received ethinylestradiol as 4 - 7th line endocrine therapy.126 This is consistent with data from other investigators who used __DES__ in patients refractory to treatment by other endocrine agents.127 An attempt to induce a withdrawal response ( at progression on an anti-oestrogen or aromatase inhibitor ) should not be forgotten .
In a recent study from Nottingham , nine of twelve patients ( 75% ) , who had " withdrawal therapy " as second to tenth line treatment , had CB with a median duration of 10+ ( 7 - 27 ) months.128 The re-discovery of the drug trilosane is another example .
Its mechanism in attacking the oestrogen-ER complex non-competitively and inhibiting the activation of transcription from the oestrogen response element opens up new possibilities in approaching the problem of tamoxifen resistance.129
There has not yet been sufficient evidence to suggest that combination treatment ( i.e. combination endocrine therapy using more than one endocrine therapy agent , or combined endocrine and cytotoxic therapy ) should be regarded as standard therapy and it remains uncertain whether combination using these new agents will open up a new horizon .
The __ATAC__ study did not show any advantage in combining tamoxifen with anastrozole , possibly because of the oestrogen agonistic effect of tamoxifen.80 Whether combination of an aromatase inhibitor and fulvestrant , the pure anti-oestrogen , would produce added advantage when compared to single agent treatment is the focus of ongoing clinical trials .
Studies comparing an aromatase inhibitor with fulvestrant and with a combination of the two are underway in the presurgical and advanced disease settings , with biological and clinical endpoints being evaluated .
As mentioned above the benefits of the combined use of an __LHRH__ agonist and a selective aromatase inhibitor for premenopausal patients with advanced breast cancer need to be confirmed by larger studies .
Recent clinical and xenograft studies have demonstrated beneficial anti-tumour effects when patients with primary breast cancer were treated with tamoxifen and gamolenic acid when compared to tamoxifen only .
An early down-regulation of ER was seen suggesting a potential synergistic role of gamolenic acid when used in combination with tamoxifen.130
As mentioned new and more potent agents ( third generation aromatase inhibitors and pure anti-oestrogen ) have been developed aiming at the old target i.e. ER. New targets have now been identified , which open up avenues for further therapeutic development .
Over-expression of __EGFR__ has been shown to be associated with tamoxifen resistance and there appears to be cross-talks between the ER and __EGFR__ pathways .
Gefitinib ( Iressa ) is a potent non-cytotoxic anthraquinolone that selectively inhibits __EGFR__ tyrosine kinase .
While it has been shown in the past that majority of ER negative breast cancer expresses __EGFR__ , the drug , which has the potential advantage of being in an oral form , may be useful at de novo or acquired tamoxifen resistance , even for an ER-positive tumour .
Phase I clinical studies have shown significant clinical activity with tumour regression or disease stabilisation in a variety of cancers [ Data from AstraZeneca ] .
Its efficacy is being investigated in an ongoing phase II trial for patients with breast cancer who have either failed on tamoxifen or have an ER negative tumour .
Preliminary data showed clinical benefit in six out of nine patients who had prior tamoxifen for ER positive advanced breast cancer.131 Similarly , a combination of anastrozole and the HER2 monoclonal antibody trastuzumab ( Herceptin ) has recently been shown to produce increased efficacy when compared to anastrozole alone in advanced breast cancer , further suggesting the importance of manipulating the ER mediated and HER pathways.132
With the availability of newer agents , defining the target population in different scenarios and optimal sequencing are important .
This will ensure that the most effective and tolerable agents are used without undermining subsequent use of other agents .
An understanding of the mechanism of action of these agents is vital to ensure no cross resistance occurs .
This is currently being addressed by both biological and clinical studies .
To date ER is the single most important predictor of response to endocrine therapy .
A recent analysis of a large series of patients with long term follow-up ( over two decades ) has established that breast cancer can be categorised into four groups according to ER and hormone sensitivity viz .
ER-positive hormone sensitive , ER-positive hormone insensitive , ER negative hormone sensitive and ER negative hormone insensitive.133 As shown in this study , these four groups of cancer , untreated by adjuvant systemic therapy , recurred in different rates as shown by differences in the disease free interval , which , in these untreated groups , reflects the inherent aggressive of the primary tumour .
Breast cancers are therefore not grouped only according to ER status in terms of their hormone responsiveness .
There are factors , other than ER , inherent in the primary tumour , which affects sensitivity to endocrine therapy .
The cell cycle regulatory protein cyclin D1 has been suggested as one of them which might account for the resistance to endocrine therapy within the ER-positive group. It will therefore be important to carry out further studies to identify these biological factors .
This is especially useful in refining the selection of patients for adjuvant endocrine therapy when the indicator of response ( i.e. the tumour itself ) is not available .
Summary and conclusions
Endocrine therapy for breast cancer has been established in the adjuvant treatment for primary disease and in the treatment of advanced disease .
The ER remains the best predictor of response although other factors exist and need to be identified .
Pharmacological manipulation has been replacing ablative procedures .
Tamoxifen used to be most popular agent of choice and promising new agents include the pure anti-oestrogens and the third generation selective aromatase inhibitors .
Ongoing and future studies will optimise treatment in established areas and will exploit its potential roles in preoperative use and chemoprevention .
