Introduction
Debate continues around follow-up of patients after treatment for breast cancer .
Guidelines in the UK recommend limited follow-up , with the __NICE__ recommending just 3 years of follow-up for patients after curative treatment of breast cancer.10 Clinicians have been reluctant to implement these guidelines , with only 9% of respondents to a recent survey reporting that their follow-up protocol conformed to the __NICE__ model.3
There is little doubt that routine clinics are an inefficient way of detecting relapse. There are other reasons for providing follow-up , most notably providing psychosocial support and detecting side effects of treatment with a view to improving quality of life .
It is widely held that women find follow-up visits reassuring,9 and expect to receive some form of follow-up after breast cancer .
Eighty-five percent of women questioned by one group of investigators at the end of a clinic visit reported that they would prefer to continue coming to routine clinics rather than simply return if they noticed problems.9
On the other hand , some women find routine clinic visits stressful .
Many report feelings of anxiety in the week before attending clinic , as they are worried that they may be diagnosed with relapse.12 Other investigators have quantified the proportion of women who suffer such anxiety , reporting that 71% of women suffer some distress during routine follow-up.11
A careful balance needs to be struck between improving quality of life through regular feedback , support and reassurance after treatment for breast cancer and temporarily reducing quality of life through bringing patients back to what many see as a stressful routine clinic appointment .
From the very limited number of randomised controlled trials which have been performed , it is difficult to be sure that balance is successfully struck by the current practice of providing routine outpatient visits for follow-up care .
Certainly , reducing or removing routine clinics altogether does not appear to alter significantly patients quality of life either for the better or worse.7
There has been little work published on what women expect in terms of follow-up after breast cancer .
Most studies regarding expectations for follow-up have been conducted in women already undergoing routine breast cancer follow-up , who have established ideas about what they expect .
It is less clear whether women have pre-conceived ideas regarding the length and type of follow-up they will receive , or indeed what they expect their clinician to achieve by providing follow-up , before embarking on their routine follow-up .
There is pressure to reduce the total amount of follow-up provided for women after breast cancer in the UK,10 but reluctance on the part of clinicians to do so.3 It is unclear how acceptable limited follow-up would be to patients .
In order to explore these issues , a survey of the expectations of women for their follow-up provision was undertaken .
For the purposes of this study , follow-up was taken to mean review appointments conducted by either an oncologist or a surgeon .
Mammography is a separate issue and will continue to be provided annually in our unit irrespective of whether women come back to a review clinic .
This was made clear to all participants of this study .
Methods
Study design
A questionnaire-based survey of the expectations for follow-up in women prior to attending their first annual review appointment .
Section criteria
Women were considered eligible for this questionnaire-based study if they met the following criteria :
- Breast cancer treated with curative intent ;
- Disease free at the time of enrolment ;
- No history of previously treated breast cancer ;
- Less than 1 year from original treatment ;
- Not yet attended for routine follow-up clinic visit ;
- Ability to consent to completing the questionnaire .
Methods
In our unit , patients are seen by the surgical staff shortly after their original operative procedure to discuss the pathology findings and prepare them to meet the oncology staff .
Patients are then referred to the oncologists for provision of adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy , if appropriate .
A routine follow-up appointment is arranged for the following year , and patients are not routinely seen by the surgical team again until this first annual review appointment .
In December 2005 , a complete list of all patients operated on with curative intent for breast cancer in the preceding 12 months was generated .
For the following 7 months a list of all women undergoing curative resection of a breast cancer was maintained prospectively .
All patients attending for their first annual review appointment between January 2006 and July 2007 were invited to participate in this study .
Letters were sent to all patients due to attend for their first annual review appointment between 2 and 3 weeks before that appointment .
Along with the questionnaire , a letter outlining the purpose of the questionnaire was sent , as was a consent form approved by the local research ethics committee .
Stamped addressed envelopes were also included to facilitate response .
The questionnaire was designed by this author in consultation with several senior consultant breast surgeons in Glasgow .
The full questionnaire is reproduced as Appendix 1.
Method of detection of the original tumour was ascertained in the questionnaire as this may influence patients confidence in their ability to self-monitor for relapse .
Expectations for frequency and duration of follow-up were asked and opinion on whether more frequent follow-up would lead to greater anxiety or greater reassurance was sought .
Traditional follow-up regimes , such as advocated by the American Society for Clinical Oncology,5 have reducing frequency of visits over 10 years as the perceived threat of relapse reduces .
We were keen to establish whether reducing the frequency of clinic visit would worry patients as they were getting less apparent reassurance , or reassure them as they perceive their clinicians level of anxiety over their risk of relapse to be reducing .
The final questions on page one of the questionnaire were designed to establish what the patients felt the main purpose of follow-up clinics were and how useful they thought routine clinic visits were for detecting relapse compared with their own self-examination .
Finally , it was felt that providing information on the success of clinics in terms of relapse detection may influence patients expectations .
An information sheet was produced which explained the likelihood of suffering relapse and the common methods by which relapses are detected in our unit .
To establish whether the provision of this information altered patients opinions about clinic attendance , the patients were asked whether they were still keen to come to clinic despite all they had read .
Finally , they were asked to suggest how they would like to be followed-up from a number of choices including telephone follow-up and traditional clinic visits .
Results
Over the 18 months of the study , 102 patients were eligible for participation .
Letters were sent to all of these women , and responses received from 79 ( 77% ) .
Mean age of the respondents was 59 years ( SD 14 years , range 26 - 86 years ) .
Method of detection of original cancer
Sixty-two women ( 78.5% ) were diagnosed with breast cancer after originally finding a lump themselves during breast self-examination .
Four women ( 5.1% ) had been__GP__ after attending with other breast related symptoms .
Three women ( 3.8% ) had been to their __GP__ with other non-breast related complaints and had their breast cancer diagnosed incidentally .
The remaining 9 women ( 11.4% ) had their cancer detected within the breast screening service .
Expectations for frequency and duration of follow-up
Seventy-four of the 79 women ( 94% ) expected to attend regular follow-up visits .
Only 4 women expected not to have to come back to clinic for further follow-up visits beyond their first annual review .
Three of these 4 women detected their own cancer originally ; one was discovered in the breast screening service .
One woman did not answer .
The frequency with which patients expected to be seen back at clinic is shown in Table 1. There was a difference in expectations for follow-up between women over 50 years old compared with those under 50. There was a very even distribution in patients under the age of 50 with regards to how frequently they expected to be brought back , with 7 patients expecting 3 monthly visits , 6 patients expecting 6 monthly visits and 7 expecting 12 monthly visits to the clinic .
This was not the case in patients over 50 , where only 6 expected to return 3 monthly compared with 24 expecting 6 monthly visits and 22 expecting annual visits ( x2 2 df , p = 0.048 ) .
Expectations regarding the duration of follow-up varied remarkably between patients .
Of the 74 patients who did expect more follow-up , 12 ( 16% ) did not answer how long they expected this to continue for and 17 ( 23% ) state that they did not know when they would be discharged .
Three patients ( 4% ) suggested that they would be discharged after all of their treatment including adjuvant hormone therapy was completed , but gave no indication as to how long they felt this would take .
Eight patients ( 11% ) expected between 1 and 3 more years of follow-up , 6 patients ( 8% ) between 3 and 5 more years and 17 ( 23% ) expected 5 more years of follow-up , with 3 of these stating that this would coincide with the end of their tamoxifen treatment .
Only 4 patients ( 5% ) expected 10 more years of follow-up , the current duration of follow-up provided in our unit , although one other patient thought she would receive follow-up visits indefinitely .
Finally , 2 patients thought they would be discharged when the surgeon was happy with their progress and 2 when they were considered by the surgeon to be " cured " or " in remission " .
Expectations of what clinics are designed to achieve
All 79 women answered whether being brought back to clinic more regularly would increase or decrease their anxiety .
Thirteen women ( 16% ) stated that more regular clinic visits would increase their anxiety .
Of these women , 8 expected only annual review visits , 4 expected 6 monthly visits and one had not answered how frequently they expected to be brought back to clinic .
Fifty-one of the 79 women ( 65% ) felt that they would be more reassured by more regular clinic visits , and 15 ( 19% ) stated that they would be neither more anxious nor more reassured by more regular clinic attendance .
There was no significant association between the age of the patient and how this question was answered .
Similarly , there was no difference between patients who had discovered their own cancer and patients whose original cancer was detected by other means in terms of whether more clinic visits would provide more or less reassurance .
Forty-six women ( 58% ) thought that the main reason they attended clinic regularly was to catch the cancer early when it came back , while 8 others ( 10% ) reported that it was one of the main reasons .
Therefore 54 women ( 68% ) saw detection of relapse as a main aim of routine clinic visits .
Only 10 patients ( 13% ) saw detection of side effects of treatment as one of the main reasons for clinic visits .
Twenty-four patients ( 30% ) felt that provision of reassurance was one of the main aims of regular clinic visits .
Again , method of detection of original cancer did not affect the way this question was answered .
In keeping with the feeling that regular clinic visits were focussed mainly on the detection of relapse , 43 women ( 54% ) thought that the clinician was more likely to detect relapse than they were .
However , 33 patients ( 42% ) believed that they were more likely to detect relapse than their doctor at the clinic .
The remaining 3 patients did not answer the question .
When this was analysed by method of detection of original relapse , women who had not detected their original cancer themselves were significantly more likely to expect a clinician to detect any subsequent relapse than those women who had detected their own original cancer ( x2 1 df , p = 0.004 ) .
Effect of information on expectations
Patients read the enclosed information sheet before completing the final 2 questions .
The information sheet stressed that routine clinics had a very low yield in terms of detecting recurrent cancer , and that regular self-examination and mammography were the best safeguards against relapse .
Metastatic and locoregional relapse were not discussed separately in the information sheet , as it was felt that mentioning metastatic disease in particular may cause unnecessary distress .
That metastatic disease is not investigated for routinely in our practice was similarly not discussed .
There are 2 statements in the information sheet regarding detection of relapse .
The first states that most relapses are symptomatic .
This refers to all types of relapse , both metastatic and locoregional .
The second statement refers only to locoregional disease .
After reading the information sheet , patients were asked whether they would still like to come to clinic regularly , knowing what they had just read .
They were assured that they would still have regular mammograms whether they elected to come to clinic or not .
The majority of patients ( 49 of the 79 , or 62% ) reported that they would still prefer to come to clinic regularly .
Only 27 of the 79 patients ( 34% ) reported that they would be happy not to come to clinic regularly .
Three patients did not answer the question .
Interestingly , there was no relationship between whether the patient wanted to continue coming back to clinic and who they thought was most likely to detect relapse if it occurred , nor was their a relationship with how the original cancer had been diagnosed .
When asked what method of follow-up they should have instead of routine clinic visits , 20 of the patients who were happy not to come back routinely suggested that they could come and see us only if they had a problem , one suggested __GP__ or nurse follow-up and 5 replied that they would be happy to receive telephone follow-up .
Discussion
In the most recent guidance from the __NICE__ , follow-up is recommended for only 2 - 3 years after treatment for breast cancer.10 There is reluctance to implement these guidelines .
A survey by Donnelly et al. of 562 clinicians involved in breast cancer follow-up revealed that , while a protocol existed for follow-up of breast cancer patients in the units of 84% of respondents , in only 9% of cases this protocol conformed to the __NICE__ guidelines.3
Reluctance to discharge patients at 3 years is understandable .
Detection of side effects of treatment , detection of new abnormalities in either breast and detection of psychological morbidity , in that order , were the 3 most commonly cited reasons for providing follow-up in Donnelly 's study.3 Recent protocols can see hormonal therapy continued for up to 8 years after diagnosis and treatment of breast cancer , with continued risk of side effects .
Psychological problems can persist for up to 10 years after breast cancer4 and potentially treatable relapse develops at a constant rate to at least 10 years.8
Yet routine clinic visits detect few relapses , with mammography and patient self-examination being much more central to the detection of locoregional relapse.8 Moreover , such visits are probably not effective at detecting psychological problems or symptoms in patients as women are reluctant to discuss such issues and doctors have not been shown to be effective at detecting problems within the clinic setting.
It is felt that women find clinic visits reassuring and want to come for such visits , but research in this area has usually been conducted in women who are part of routine follow-up programmes. This is the first time the expectations of women have been explored prior to their commencing routine follow-up , or being informed of the protocol .
The majority of women in this study did expect further follow-up , and over half of the patients questioned expected to be brought back to clinic more frequently than annually , the current frequency adopted in our unit .
Women were uncertain about how long they would remain in follow-up .
Thirty-nine percent of women either did not know or did not answer , and only 5% of women expected to be followed-up for 10 years , the duration of follow-up currently provided in our unit .
The majority of women who answered expected 5 years or less of follow-up .
So while women usually have some idea of the amount of follow-up they expect , this is usually more frequent than currently provided in our unit but for a briefer duration .
The majority of women felt that more frequent clinic visits would provide more reassurance .
This is somewhat contrary to our own experience with reducing frequency of follow-up in practice .
In the past , patients have associated a reduction in the frequency of their visits as an indication that our estimation of their risk of relapse is lessening , and they often report feeling that reducing the frequency with which they attend clinic is a positive step towards the " all clear " .
It is therefore surprising to see such a high proportion of women keen to receive higher frequency visits .
Sixty-eight percent of women in this study see detection of relapse as being the most important reason for coming back for routine follow-up visits .
It is possible from the expectations they have for frequency and duration of follow-up that women have a perception that their risk of relapse is high in the first few years after treatment of their original cancer but that the risk falls off .
While we know that to be the pattern of relapse for metastatic disease,8 routine clinic visits are not usually focussed on the detection of distant disease .
We know that the risk of potentially treatable relapse does not fall off after 5 years .
In order not to cause undue distress in our patients , in this study we did not highlight the pattern of relapse .
It would be interesting to see whether being told that the risk of potentially treatable relapse remains constant for at least 10 years and probably beyond altered any of the findings in this study .
Only 13% of our patients saw side effect detection as important and only 30% felt that provision of reassurance was an aim of the clinic visits .
Patients appear to have very different expectations from clinicians regarding what we are trying to achieve with follow-up .
If patients do not see the clinic as being geared towards detecting side effects of treatment and / or psychological problems , they may be less likely to divulge problems .
This would explain why routine clinic visits have been so poor at detecting such problems in the past .
And yet , when provided with confirmatory evidence of the relatively ineffective nature of clinics in terms of relapse detection , the majority of patients ( 62% ) stated that they would still prefer to come to clinic , even 19 patients who believed that they were more likely to detect their own relapse than a clinician .
This study highlights a number of important issues , and raises several questions .
Women expect follow-up , but there is no consistency regarding how frequently or for how long .
Even though the majority of women see relapse detection as important , provision of the information that routine clinic visits are not effective at detecting such relapse does not deter many women from wanting to come back to clinic , even among those who feel that they are more likely to detect their own relapse than their clinician .
However , most expect to be discharged within 5 years .
It has not been explored here whether the information regarding long-term risk of relapse would alter patients expectation regarding length of follow-up .
While the sample size in the current study is small , a number of women expressed that they would be happy not to return back to follow-up clinics , provided that they continued to receive annual mammography , when the inefficiency of such clinics was highlighted to them .
Further work in our unit on alternative methods of follow-up has confirmed these findings , with recent preliminary trials of alternative follow-up methods attracting large numbers of recruits .
Further work should be done in this area in an attempt to quantify which women would be happy to receive follow-up in the form of annual mammography alone , or perhaps simply less frequent clinic visits , and to confirm the generalizability of our findings to other areas of the country .
Perhaps patient expectations could be sought in order to tailor individual follow-up programmes to better meet patients needs .
Conclusions
This study highlights that women have many different expectations about the structure and goals of follow-up prior to their first annual review appointment .
Aside from relapse detection , their expectations are not the same as those of their clinicians , who place the importance of detection of side effects of therapy and psychological concerns far higher than patients do .
The low expectations of patients in this regard may hinder clinicians in achieving some of the central aims of follow-up .
