Historically , follow-up in breast cancer has focused on the early detection of relapse .
The approach to detecting locoregional and metastatic relapse has changed as understanding of the natural history of the disease has improved .
The diagnosis of incurable metastatic disease when patients are still asymptomatic does not significantly alter outcome ( Del Turco et al , 1994 ; The GIVIO investigators , 1994 ) .
Moreover , regular visits are likely to increase distress and reduce quality of life , and may lead to unnecessary treatment ( Del Turco et al , 1994 ; The GIVIO investigators , 1994 ) .
Tests to detect metastatic disease are no longer recommended ( National Institute for Clinical Excellence , 2002 ) .
Unlike metastatic relapse , it is generally accepted that , particularly in patients who have had breast-conserving surgery , locoregional relapse is potentially treatable and should be detected early .
Regular periodic mammography and clinical examination are performed to detect asymptomatic ipsilateral and contralateral disease .
However , in a recent meta-analysis routine clinic visits were at best inefficient in the detection of treatable locoregional relapse .
We have previously reported that only one-third of these are detected by clinicians at routine visits in asymptomatic patients , representing one relapse detected for every 175 routine clinic visits .
Despite locoregional relapse being relatively rare , and most such relapses being detected by other means , many clinicians still consider routine clinical examination necessary for detection of relapse .
Increasingly , less frequent or shorter follow-up is being advised in an attempt to improve efficiency .
While reduced follow-up has been shown to be acceptable to patients , little is known of its impact on loco-regional relapse detection and overall survival .
We have examined the pattern of treatable relapse in our unit , particularly with regard to its timing and method of detection , relating our findings to current guidelines to highlight their likely effect on our patients .
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Between 1991 and 1998 , 1312 patients were treated for early stage breast cancer by breast conservation surgery , axillary node sampling or clearance and postoperative radiotherapy to the breast + / - ipsilateral lymphatics .
Systemic therapy was given according to local and national guidelines .
Follow-up was shared between the Edinburgh Breast Unit and the Department of Clinical Oncology , Western General Hospital , Edinburgh .
Although initial clinical follow-up consisted of 3-4 monthly visits for the first 2 years , 6 monthly for 3 years then annual visits until the tenth anniversary , from 2000 , all patients were changed to annual follow-up visits only .
Throughout , all patients were instructed in regular breast self-examination .
Additional interval visits for assessment were arranged by patients , their general practitioner or other health-care professionals as required .
Patients were usually discharged to the national breast screening unit at 10 years .
Annual bilateral mammography was undertaken throughout .
Median follow-up was 10 years , range 1.5-15 years .
Characteristics of the included patients are presented in Table 1.
Locoregional relapse was defined as any relapse in the ipsilateral breast and axilla or the contralateral breast .
Contralateral breast cancers are included here as the risk of subsequent contralateral breast cancer in patients who have had a previous breast cancer is 3-5 times greater than the population risk .
As such , detecting new contralateral cancers is an important component of breast cancer follow-up programmes .
Supraclavicular relapse was included with metastatic disease .
Detection of metastatic disease within 3 months of locoregional relapse was considered to constitute simultaneous local and distant relapse and these patients were excluded from the analysis .
A list of all patients known to have suffered an isolated locoregional relapse or new contralateral cancer was generated from our database in January 2006 .
A retrospective study of these case records was then undertaken .
Time from diagnosis to relapse , method of detection of relapse ( routine mammography , routine clinical examination in an asymptomatic patient or investigation of a patient who attended complaining of relevant symptoms ) and type of clinic ( routine or interval ) was recorded .
Time from relapse to development of metastatic disease or death was then calculated and survival was compared for each mode of detection .
For all relapses detected clinically in the first instance , we established whether the relapse was also visible on mammography .
RESULTS
Between 1991 and 1998 , 1312 patients were treated for primary operable breast cancer by breast conservation surgery .
Figure 1 displays overall survival , Figure 2 cause specific survival .
The overall 5 year survival was 89.2% ; 10 year survival was 77.2% .
Not included in the analysis were 31 patients with synchronous locoregional and metastatic disease and 11 with metastatic disease before locoregional relapse ; these are included as metastatic relapse in Figure 3 ( see below ) .
A total of 116 patients suffered an isolated locoregional relapse .
After exclusion of four lacking available records , and two lost to follow-up through moving away from the area , 110 patients were left for analysis .
Details of all patients with treatable relapse are shown in Table 2.
48 patients developed ipsilateral breast relapse , 11 with concomitant axillary disease .
Twenty-five patients had isolated ipsilateral axillary relapse and 35 developed new contralateral cancers .
One patient developed ipsilateral breast and axillary relapse and a new contralateral cancer simultaneously and one developed ipsilateral breast relapse and a new contralateral cancer simultaneously .
The recurrence rate in this cohort is presented as Figure 3. The incidence of metastatic relapse peaks at just over 3% per annum at 2-3 years and remains above 2% per year for up to 5 years before falling off .
In contrast , the incidence of locoregional relapse remains constant at 1-1.5% over the whole follow-up period .
Site of relapse and method of detection are summarised for the 110 patients in Table 3 , together with the numbers who died ( in brackets ) .
Interval appointments
Twenty-three of the 110 patients ( 21% ) had relapse detected at an interval clinic visit of whom 22 complained of relevant symptoms , and the other had an abnormality noticed by careers .
Of these 23 patients , 10 had ipsilateral breast relapse , 6 axillary relapse and 2 had synchronous breast and axillary relapse , with symptoms from both sites .
Five patients discovered their new contralateral cancer .
Two patients ( 2% ) were referred back to clinic having been discharged from further follow-up at 10 years post-treatment .
One complained of symptoms related to axillary relapse ( included in Table 3 as having been diagnosed at an interval clinic with symptoms ) and one had abnormal routine breast screening mammograms , which indicated breast and axillary relapse ( included in Table 3 as routine mammographically detected relapse ) .
Routine appointments
The remaining 85 relapses ( 77% ) were detected at routine clinics or by routine mammography .
The pattern of relapse and method of detection for this group is also presented in Table 3.
Of the four ipsilateral breast recurrences diagnosed clinically , the most recent annual surveillance mammogram was negative in two .
Mammography was repeated and was negative in the third .
In the fourth , mammography did reveal some distortion , but this was reported as benign post-surgical changes in their first routine follow-up mammogram 1 year after surgery .
Neither of the two contralateral cancers detected clinically were visible on mammography .
Of the nine axillary relapses diagnosed clinically , one also visible on mammography was included as a clinical diagnosis as it was diagnosed at a routine appointment at which mammography was not scheduled .
In total , 37 relapses ( 33.5% ) were symptomatic , 56 ( 51% ) mammographically detected , 15 ( 13.5% ) clinically detected and 2 ( 2% ) were diagnosed incidentally .
A total of 10415 mammograms were undertaken during follow-up , with 56 treatable relapses diagnosed that is 5.37 treatable relapses per 1000 mammograms .
Survival
Details of the 37 deaths among the 110 patients during the follow-up period are shown in Table 3.
Ipsilateral breast : Forty-eight patients suffered ipsilateral breast recurrence , of whom 11 had additional axillary recurrence .
Overall 5 year survival was 87.5% from original operation , and 64% from diagnosis of recurrence .
Survival by method of detection is shown below .
Overall survival was significantly reduced among those with recurrence diagnosed clinically compared with either other method ( log rank 2 df P=0.0002 ) .
This remains highly significant even if cases with axillary disease are excluded ( P=0.0004 ) , and reflects a significantly longer survival from recurrence ( log rank 2 df P=0.0014 ) rather than a difference in time to recurrence detection .
The pathological characteristics of the recurrent disease are presented as Table 4. Mean age at recurrence is also shown .
Nodal status was available for all 48 patients .
Size of the recurrent lesion was unavailable for 10 women , with grade of the recurrence unavailable for 13. Receptor status was seldom available .
Trends for those with clinically detected relapse to be older than others , and for mammographically detected lesions to be smallest at detection , with symptomatic largest , were not significant .
Overall , there was no significant difference in any of the clinicopathological features in relation to how relapse was detected , and Nottingham Prognostic Index of the relapse was similar for all three groups .
Contralateral breast : There was no association between method of detection of relapse and survival in patients who developed a new contralateral breast cancer .
However , 25 out of 35 of these ( 71% ) were diagnosed by mammography with 8 self-diagnosed and 2 picked up on clinical examination .
Both of the patients with new cancers detected clinically were well at last follow-up .
Overall 5 year survival from time of relapse for all patients with contralateral breast relapse was 81% .
Ipsilateral axilla : There was similarly no association between method of detection of recurrence and survival in patients who had isolated ipsilateral axillary relapse , although the numbers overall were small .
Overall 5 year survival from time of relapse for patients with axillary relapse was 61% .
DISCUSSION
The most recent guidelines for the follow-up of breast cancer patients from the __ASCO__ recommend 3-6 monthly follow-up for 3 years , 6-12 monthly for 2 years then annual follow-up .
No advice is given regarding discharge , although 1999 guidelines recommended this at 10 years ( American Society of Clinical Oncology , 1999 ) .
In Canada , the Steering Committee guidelines state that there is no compelling evidence to support any particular frequency of clinic visits , but concludes that visits should be more frequent initially due to a higher risk of recurrence in the first few years , reducing to annual after 3-5 years and being continued indefinitely ( The Steering Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Care and Treatment of Breast Cancer , 1998 ) .
Annual mammography is recommended by both groups , although __ASCO__ acknowledge the lack of good evidence .
In contrast , the recent guidelines for England and Wales ( NICE ) recommend follow-up of only 2-3 years in total , but leave frequency of visits open ( National Institute for Clinical Excellence , 2002 ) .
The __BASO__ recommends slightly longer follow-up , with discharge at 5 years , again leaving frequency of visits open ( The Association of Breast Surgery @ __BASO__ and Royal College of Surgeons of England , 2005 ) .
Neither group recommends how often mammography should be performed , with NICE stating that evidence-based protocols should be agreed locally , and __BASO__ referring to the Royal College of Radiologists advice that mammography should be every 1-2 years ( The Royal College of Radiologists , 1995 ) .
Although these guidelines appear to vary markedly , all assume that relapse is commonest in the first few years after treatment .
A greater hazard rate for relapse during the first 3 years was just evident in the ATAC trial ( The ATAC Trialists Group , 2005 ) , but reflects a higher rate of distant relapse in this period .
Others have reported that the rate of locoregional relapse is initially high , and then falls off , so that most treatable relapses occur in the first 3-5 years .
However , these studies do not include new contralateral cancers .
Other studies have a very brief median follow-up , without analysis of recurrence over the long term .
The present study confirms that rate of distant relapse peaks in the first 5 years , but this is not mirrored by the pattern of locoregional relapse , which remains constant at 1-1.5% for at least 10 years .
Others have also reported that while the incidence of true local recurrence declines with time , that of new breast cancers in other areas of the previously treated breast and new contralateral breast cancers increases with time , so that the overall rate of treatable relapse remains constant for over 15 years .
The second assumption in various guidelines is that clinical examinations are of particular value , with more frequent visits recommended during the perceived high-risk period of the first few years .
Previous studies have consistently shown that multiple clinical visits do little to increase yield and only serve to reduce the cost effectiveness of follow-up .
Our data confirm this .
In 10 years of follow-up in 1312 women , only 15 relapses were detected clinically .
This is a very low yield .
Mammography in contrast makes a much larger and more significant contribution to relapse detection , not only in the area of contralateral new breast cancer detection but also in detecting ipsilateral breast recurrence .
In fact , a detection rate of 5.37 cancers per 1000 mammograms is higher than that reported as recently as 2003 by the breast screening service in the UK that carries out 3 yearly mammography ( NHS Cancer Screening Programmes , 2003 ) , and is equivalent to that in this body 's latest ( 2007 ) report .
Why patients with clinically detected relapse do less well is unclear from this study , and although slightly older on average , the difference was not significant .
Nottingham Prognostic Index for the relapse was similar for all three methods of detection .
Our data reveal that the basic assumptions behind the guidelines for follow-up are incorrect .
If a central aim is the detection of treatable relapse , as stated in the guidelines , there is no justification for focussing on the first 2-3 years after treatment ; treatable relapse occurs at a constant rate over at least 10 years .
Our data suggest that clinical examinations do not improve outcome .
Women are well schooled in self-surveillance of their breasts .
Axillary relapse , on the contrary , is more frequently detected by clinicians , 36% being so detected .
However , isolated axillary relapse was relatively rare , with just 25 in 1312 patients over 10 years , and only nine clinically detected relapses .
We intend to highlight the need for regular axillary self-examination , not previously stressed , and hope this will further improve the yield of self-examination , particularly in this era of sentinel lymph node biopsy .
Detection of treatable relapse is only one of the aims of follow-up .
Additional aims concern psychological problems and adverse effects of therapy , particularly lymphoedema ( National Institute for Clinical Excellence , 2002 ) .
It is uncertain whether routine clinic visits achieve these aims .
While women do find clinics reassuring when told they do not have recurrence , visits are also attended by great anxiety .
There is little doubt that clinicians are not good at detecting psychological problems in the clinical setting and patients are reluctant to report such psychological problems themselves .
Certainly , one study has shown no reduction in quality of life among women randomised to receive no routine clinic visits compared with regular visits .
Whether routine clinics are necessary for the detection and treatment of adverse effects of therapy is also uncertain .
Detection of lymphoedema is given central importance in the NICE guidelines , although its symptoms do not correlate with objective measurements of arm swelling .
Moreover , there is little in the way of an effective therapy .
Side effects of treatment might be detected better by education and focussing follow-up on the symptomatic individual .
Aromatase inhibitors have introduced a new consideration in follow-up .
The NICE guidelines only mention adjuvant hormonal therapy to say that the general practitioner should be responsible for stopping it at 5 years ( National Institute for Clinical Excellence , 2002 ) .
With recent indications for switch and extended aromatase treatments , which are instituted in specialist care , discharge to general practice after 3 years would not be appropriate .
Moreover , hormonal therapy can significantly impact patients overall well being , particularly in the first 3 months of therapy .
Patients should have access to specialist advice to help ameliorate any symptoms .
Long-term rapid and flexible access to specialist care would be ideal in the face of new developments in breast cancer treatment , and emphasis should be placed on psychological and physical well-being .
It is also likely that new hormonal therapies will alter the pattern of relapse so that even fewer relapses occur in the first 3 years after treatment ( The ATAC Trialists Group , 2005 ) .
