Introduction
A family history of breast cancer is one of the most important risk factors for the disease .
Epidemiological studies estimate that breast cancer is approximately twice as common among first-degree relatives of breast cancer patients , suggesting strongly that genetic factors are important determinants of disease risk ( Collaborative Group in Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer , 2001 ) .
The two most important breast cancer susceptibility genes , BRCA1 and BRCA2 , were identified by linkage analysis and positional cloning in the 1990s .
Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are rare , but confer high risks of breast and ovarian cancer and smaller risks for other cancers ( The Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium , 1999 ; Thompson and Easton , 2002 ; Antoniou et al. , 2003 ) .
Well over 1000 different mutations have been identified in BRCA1 and BRCA2 , and genetic testing for mutations in these genes in high-risk families is now well established .
In addition to BRCA1 and BRCA2 , five other genes can be considered well established breast cancer susceptibility genes .
Germline mutations in the TP53 gene have been implicated as the cause of the Li - Fraumeni syndrome .
Breast cancer appears as a feature of this syndrome and carriers of TP53 mutations are at high risk of developing early-onset breast cancer .
However , the proportion of early-onset breast cancer in the general population explained by TP53 mutations is small as mutations are very rare .
Breast cancer is also a feature of the Cowden syndrome caused by mutations in the PTEN gene , but such mutations are also uncommon in the general population .
Patients with Petz - Jeghers syndrome have been found to be at increased risk of breast cancer .
This syndrome is caused by truncating mutations in the LKB1 gene , but its involvement in breast cancer appears to be only in patients with the syndrome .
In addition to these cancer syndromes , two other genes are associated with more moderate risks of breast cancer .
Approximately 0.5% of the population is estimated to carry a germline mutation in the ATM gene .
Studies based on relatives of ataxia-telangiectasia patients , and breast cancer case - control studies , have estimated that the relative risk of breast cancer in heterozygous carriers of ATM mutations is approximately 2 , with some evidence of higher relative risk under the age of 50 years .
Specific mutations , notably 7271T>G , may confer higher breast cancer risks , although the evidence is limited .
More recently , a truncating variant in CHEK2 , 1100delC , has also been shown to confer an approximately twofold risk of breast cancer .
The variant occurs with a frequency of 0.5 - 2% in the European populations ( The CHEK2-Breast Cancer Consortium , 2004 ) .
Whereas no other deleterious variants occur at a significant frequency in the UK , other deleterious mutations including S428F , CHEK2del5567 and perhaps Il57T have been identified in other populations .
Evidence for other breast cancer susceptibility genes
The clearest evidence for other susceptibility genes comes from studies of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation screening in population-based series of breast cancer patients .
Notwithstanding the fact that BRCA1 / 2 mutations are common in women with a strong family history of the disease , these studies demonstrate that only a minority of cases without a family history of the disease harbour a mutation in either of these genes .
Two studies have estimated that the proportion of the familial risk of breast cancer that is accounted for by BRCA1 and BRCA2 is approximately 15% ( Peto et al. , 1999 ; Anglian Breast Cancer Study Group , 2000 ) .
Even allowing for the more minor effects of the other known genes , it has been estimated that the known genes can account for no more than 25% of the familial aggregation of breast cancer , indicating that the majority of the familial clustering is still unexplained .
Environmental factors that cluster in families are unlikely to explain all the residual familial clustering .
Simulation studies have shown that , even with complete correlation among relatives in the exposure to the environmental factor , such risk factors need to confer at least a 10 fold increase in risk to lead to even modest increases to the familial relative risk .
Among the known risk factors for breast cancer , none confers such high risks .
Twin studies
Twin studies provide a powerful means for evaluating whether the familial clustering of disease is due to environmental or hereditary factors .
As __MZ__ twins are genetically identical , whereas __MZ__ twins share only half their genetic material , genetic susceptibility should be reflected in a greater disease concordance among __MZ__ than __DZ__ twins .
The largest such study was conducted by Lichtenstein_et_al. , who combined data from the Nordic twin and cancer registries .
They estimated that the relative risk of breast cancer in __MZ__ twins of breast cancer patients is 5.2 , compared to 2.8 in __DZ__ twins of breast cancer patients .
Similar evidence of higher relative risks among __MZ__ twins compared to __DZ__ twins was found in other studies .
Swerdlow_et_al. found that the differences in the relative risks between __MZ__ and __DZ__ twins of affected probands were highest when the first affected twin was diagnosed under the age of 35 years .
For this age group , the relative risk among __MZ__ twins was estimated to be 34.7 , although this was based on small numbers .
Based on the known effects of BRCA1 and BRCA2 , the authors estimated that mutations in these genes alone cannot explain this high relative risk among __MZ__ twins and other high-penetrant genes or a combination of genes must explain the residual risk .
Using a multifactorial model , Lichtenstein_et_al. estimated that genetic factors account for approximately 27% of breast cancer phenotypic variance .
However , this estimate is of limited value as it is highly dependent on the assumed model .
Another twin study that has provided interesting insights into possible models of susceptibility was conducted by Peto and Mack .
Their study was a prospective follow-up of __MZ__ twins of breast cancer patients .
In this study , they estimated the breast cancer incidence to be constant and approximately 1.3% per year , independent of age and duration of follow-up .
More recently , Hemminki and Li have found this incidence rate to decrease with time since the diagnosis of the first twin , but the numbers in this study were small and therefore not necessarily inconsistent .
Peto and Mack also note that this incidence rate is about twice the incidence rate for contralateral breast cancer ( which are also roughly constant with time ) , consistent with the hypothesis that the high rate of contralateral breast cancer chiefly reflects genetic susceptibility ( but with only one breast being at risk ) .
Such a high incidence in __MZ__ twins is incompatible with a Mendelian model of inheritance with only two susceptibility categories .
This has led the authors to postulate that their results are more consistent with the hypothesis that genetic susceptibility to breast cancer may be the result of multiple low-penetrance alleles which may coexist in high penetrant combinations , that is , a type of polygenic model .
They also propose that the high constant risk could reflect a model in which women reach a high risk of breast cancer at a genetically determined age .
Such a model would be radically different from the usual models of carcinogenesis , in which the risk of disease is driven by a series of rate-limiting events and age itself is relatively unimportant .
However , the constancy of the incidence rate is also supported by the absence of inflexion in contralateral breast cancer risks around menopause , which is usually observed in the general population .
Mathematical models
Possible genetic models can be assessed by segregation analysis , in which different statistical models are fitted to pedigree data .
Several such studies have been performed , but most pre-date the identification of BRCA1 and BRCA2 ( e.g. , see Bishop et al. , 1988 ; Newman et al. , 1988 ; Amos et al. , 1991 ; Claus et al. , 1991 ) .
Many , although not all , found evidence for dominant susceptibility to breast cancer .
These models provided some impetus for linkage studies that led to the identification of the high-risk susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 .
However , these models are now of limited value as they do not consider the effects of the known susceptibility genes .
More recently , Cui_et_al. used data on families ascertained through a population-based series of breast cancer patients from Australia to investigate the models that best explain the residual , non-BRCA1 / 2 familial clustering of breast cancer .
They tested all probands for mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 , and when they excluded the families of mutation carriers from the analysis , the most parsimonious model for the familial clustering of breast cancer was a mixed model of inheritance , including both a recessive and a polygenic component .
The disease allele at this recessive locus was estimated to have a frequency of 7% , and homozygote carriers were at a very high risk of developing breast cancer .
However , this analysis may still have included some families with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations because of the incomplete sensitivity of the mutation-screening techniques used .
An alternative approach was followed by Antoniou_et_al. , who used combined data from families ascertained through population-based studies of breast cancer patients and data from families with multiple-affected individuals to model the simultaneous effects of BRCA1 , BRCA2 and other genes , while allowing for the reduced sensitivity of the mutation testing .
This segregation analysis found that familial aggregation of breast cancer is best explained by a model that includes the effects of BRCA1 , BRCA2 and a polygenic component .
This polygenic model represents the effects of a large number of genes , each conferring a small effect on risk and combining multiplicatively .
There was no significant evidence for an additional major gene .
In a recent reanalysis , using additional data from population based studies of breast cancer and mutation positive families , there was evidence that the polygenic variance decreased with age ( Antoniou et al. , 2005 ; Antoniou and Easton , 2006 ; manuscript in preparation ) .
This model would imply that at least some of the component polygenes confer higher relative risks at young ages .
This model seems to provide a good fit to the observed age-specific familial relative risks of breast cancer .
The polygenic model implies a log-normal distribution of risk in the general population and would also support the suggestion of Peto and Mack that most breast cancers occur among a susceptible minority of women ( see Twin studies above ) .
This model is the basis for the BOADICEA model of genetic susceptibility to breast cancer , which can be used for genetic counselling purposes .
The reasons for the difference between the Cui_et_al. and Antoniou_et_al. models is unclear , but might be due to the early age at the onset of the cases ( below at 40 years ) in the Cui et al. study , perhaps reflecting some specific genetic effects at young age .
It is also important to note that , although the presence of a polygenic component suggests that the number of susceptibility loci is large , the analyses cannot predict the precise number , or the risks they confer .
BOADICEA somewhat underpredicts the risks to __MZ__ twins of cases reported by Peto and Mack and the risk of contralateral breast cancer .
This suggests either some additional genetic component not captured by the Antoniou et al. model or perhaps that the Peto and Mack twin risks are overestimates and the high risk of contralateral breast cancer ( and perhaps also the __MZ__ twin risk ) is partly due to individual non-genetic factors .
However , the predictions are closer to the estimates based on data from the Swedish Family Cancer Registry .
An alternative model to BOADICEA was developed by Tyrer_et_al. , which assumes the effects of BRCA1 , BRCA2 and of a third , dominantly inherited hypothetical gene .
However , this was developed by modelling the published recurrence risks among first-degree relatives as opposed to family data .
Associated phenotypes
A number of risk factors other than family history have been implicated in the development of breast cancer .
Some of these risk factors will themselves be influenced by genetic factors , and studying these factors may provide clues to underlying models of susceptibility and lead to the identification of further susceptibility genes .
Mammographic density is perhaps the most important such risk factor .
Mammographic density is strongly predictive of breast cancer risk in the general population , with relative risks of four- to six-fold associated with the highest category of breast density compared with the lowest .
Twin studies have demonstrated that mammographic density has a strong genetic component , and it has also been reported that first-degree relatives of women with increased mammographic density are at higher risk of developing breast cancer .
Such findings provide evidence that breast cancer and mammographic density are likely to have a common genetic basis .
It has been estimated that genetic factors that influence mammographic density may explain between 5 and 8% of the observed excess risk of breast cancer among first-degree relatives .
More recently , it has also been demonstrated that breast cancer risk is associated with density in BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers , in line with the findings that high mammographic density is associated with the risk of developing both oestrogen receptor ( ER ) -positive and ER-negative breast cancer .
Mammographic density is not , however , higher in BRCA1 or BRCA2 carriers , indicating that genes influencing density act independently of BRCA1 / 2 mutation status .
A number of candidate gene studies for mammographic density have been performed , but no genes have been implicated with certainty ( e.g. Hong et al. , 2004 ; Mulhall et al. , 2005 ; van Duijnhoven et al. , 2005 ) .
Segregation analyses of mammographic density have provided some evidence for a major gene component , but have not been able to distinguish between various models of susceptibility .
Another well-established predictor of breast cancer risk is age at menopause .
An earlier age at menopause ( both natural and surgical ) is associated with a lower breast cancer risk ( Collaborative Group in Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer , 2001 ) .
Estimates for the heritability of age at menopause are in the range 31 - 87% .
A few candidate gene studies and linkage analyses have been performed for age at menopause ( see , for example , te Velde and Pearson , 2002 ; Kok et al. , 2005 ) , but none have provided concrete evidence of any susceptibility genes .
Other phenotypes with a genetic component that have also shown associations with breast cancer risk include body mass index , bone mineral density , chromosomal radiosensitivity , levels of insulin-like growth factor-I and their binding proteins and sex hormone levels .
Modifiers of breast cancer risk in BRCA1 / 2 carriers
Another important question is whether the breast cancer risks in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers are themselves influenced by genetic factors .
Penetrance estimates based on mutation-positive families ascertained through population-based series of breast cancer patients have generally been lower than estimates based on families with multiple-affected individuals .
Moreover , the risks have been found to vary by age at diagnosis and the type of cancer of the index patient .
Such observations are consistent with the hypothesis that the breast cancer risk in carriers is modified by genetic factors .
Several breast cancer risk factors , including parity , early oophorectomy and mammographic density , also influence the risk of breast cancer in carriers , and a plausible model is that breast cancer susceptibility alleles in the general population also confer similar relative risk in carriers .
Segregation analysis has demonstrated that such a model fits the observed data well , and such modifying effects are built into the BOADICEA model .
However , the possibility of BRCA1 / 2-specific modifiers cannot be ruled out .
Conversely , one known risk allele , CHEK2*1100delC , does not appear to confer a breast cancer risk in BRCA1 or BRCA2 carriers ( or , more precisely , does not confer a similar relative risk to that in non-carriers ) , perhaps reflecting the fact that these genes act in a common pathway .
Progress in finding other genes
Evidence from linkage studies
Two main strategies have been used to identify further susceptibility genes .
The first approach has been to conduct genetic linkage studies in multiple case breast cancer families that do not segregate BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations .
Two genome-wide linkage screens have been published .
The first included 14 multiple case families from Finland .
This study found evidence for linkage to markers on 2q32 .
However , a second much larger study , using 149 families negative for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations analysed by the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium , failed to confirm this finding .
The highest LOD score in the latter study was 1.80 on 4q .
Although this peak is suggestive , further studies will be required to confirm or refute whether the region harbours a susceptibility locus .
Overall , the study found no excess in the number of LOD scores over 1 , over that expected by chance , suggesting that all the peaks could be spurious .
Other studies have suggested linkage to chromosomes 8p and 13q12 - 13 regions identified through loss of heterozygosity studies .
Neither of these regions was , however , confirmed by either the BCLC study or the Finnish study .
Thus , to date , linkage analyses have failed to find any compelling evidence of linkage to any region .
The results suggest that no one gene is responsible for a significant fraction of breast cancer susceptibility , providing further support for the polygenic model .
Association studies
The other main approach to identifying susceptibility genes has been through case - control association studies .
These studies test directly the frequency of putative susceptibilility variants in breast cancer cases and matched controls .
Such studies do not require high-risk families and have much greater power to detect alleles of moderate effect .
Association studies have generally concentrated on candidate genes , chosen by virtue of their potential involvement in carcinogenesis - examples include genes involved in carcinogen metabolism , genes in the oestrogen pathway , DNA double-strand break repair genes and genes involved in cell apoptosis .
Studies __SNPs__ ) or have attempted to study all common variation in the gene using an SNP tagging approach .
Several positive associations have been reported but , to date , none of these has been convincingly replicated .
The likely reason for this is that many association studies are being conducted but only a small proportion of __SNPs__ are truly associated with breast cancer , so that most reported associations are likely to be false positives .
Very stringent significant levels ( P<0.0001 or better ) are required to avoid a high false-positive rate , but if the true effect sizes are small , most studies will lack the power to detect the associations reliably .
In a recent attempt to rectify this problem , the __BCAC__ has been established .
This is a collaborative effort to conduct more powerful association studies by combining data from over 20 groups .
__BCAC__ has recently published the results on 16 __SNPs__ , which were genotyped by at least three of the participating groups with sample sizes in excess of 10000 cases and controls , representing the majority of all available data on those __SNPs__ ( The Breast Cancer Association Consortium , 2006 ) .
There was no significant evidence of association with breast cancer for 11 of those __SNPs__ .
Five polymorphisms showed some evidence of association with P-values ranging between 0.009 and 0.06 : rare alleles of CASP8 D302H , IGFBP3-202c>a and SOD2 V16A polymorphisms were associated with a reduced risk for breast cancer , whereas the rare alleles of PGR V660L and TGFB1 L10P were associated with an increased risk of breast cancer .
These are currently being followed up in a larger study .
Future directions
The evidence to date strongly suggests that the majority of the familial clustering of breast cancer is unexplained and , therefore , that other breast cancer susceptibility genes still remain to be identified .
The failure of linkage analyses to find other breast cancer susceptibility genes , together with the segregation analyses , suggests that genes with effects similar to BRCA1 and BRCA2 are unlikely to exist , or at least that mutations in such genes will be very rare .
A more plausible model is that residual genetic susceptibility is driven by variants at many loci , each conferring a moderate risk of the disease .
The effects of mammographic density and menopause on risk also appear to be consistent with such a polygenic model .
Linkage studies , even in large numbers of families , have limited power to detect such genes .
However , recent advances in technology have provided the opportunity for __GWA__ studies .
In these studies , several hundred thousand __SNPs__ are genotyped , sufficient to report on the majority of common variation in the genome ( Pe'er et al. , 2006 ) .
Thus , these studies offer the opportunity to identify most common variants ( allele frequencies greater than or equal to5% ) that are substantially associated with breast cancer .
Several such studies are now ongoing and results are likely in the near future .
__GWA__ studies will not , however , be able to identify rare variants conferring moderate risks , as these are not well tagged by the common tagging __SNPs__ .
Instead , resequencing of suitable individuals followed by individual testing of variants in case - control and / or family studies is required .
With current technologies , this is only feasible on a candidate gene basis .
The identification of new genes could make a major impact in risk prediction .
For example , Pharoah_et_al. have estimated , on the basis of the polygenic model , that half of all breast cancer cases occur in the 12% of women at the highest genetic risk .
Although it is unrealistic to believe that all the susceptibility alleles will be found in the near future , even identifying a more limited number of susceptibility alleles could have important consequences .
This may be particularly true for women with a family history of the disease , where determining their genetic status could substantially alter their risk and consequently their management .
A major challenge will be to incorporate the effects of new genes into mathematical models .
The polygenic model , as implemented in BOADICEA , provides a framework for this .
However , to do this it will be necessary to determine not only the risks associated with different variants but also their combined effects and the interactions with lifestyle factors .
Evaluating the combined effects of many genes is a problem that will require both statistical analysis of large association studies and a better biological understanding of the pathways involved .
