Randomised trials have shown that breast screening reduces breast cancer mortality ( Jonsson et al , 2000 , 2001 , 2003 ; Duffy et al , 2002 ; Nyström et al , 2002 ; Tabar et al , 2003 ) .
Whether this is achieved in routine practice requires monitoring as certain factors might alter the effect .
These include technical changes in the mammographic equipment since the trials , different screening frequencies to those of the trials , expertise of the professionals involved , and quality of the assessment process .
For this reason , quality assurance is a fundamental part of the __NHSBSP__ , which aims at minimum standards and improved performance so that women have access to high-quality screening service wherever they live ( __NHS__ , 2006 ) .
The case-control design is convenient and its basic principle here is simple : women who have died from the disease are selected as the cases and for each , we select as controls a number of age-matched women ( usually one or two ) known to be alive at the time of death of the case .
We then compare the screening histories of cases and controls prior to the diagnosis dates of the cases .
If the screening is reducing mortality from the disease , the cases will tend to have lesser screening histories than the controls .
The design is prone to certain biases , in particular , self-selection bias , since women who accept the invitation to screening may have better health status a priori than those who do not , conferring a reduced likelihood of dying from the disease independent of screening .
This is a bias in favour of screening , and a method for correcting it is given by Duffy_et_al .
We therefore conducted a case-control study to
1. estimate the effect of the __NHSBSP__ on breast cancer mortality in the East Anglian region of the UK , adjusting for self-selection bias ; and
2. ascertain whether the reduction in breast cancer mortality being achieved is consistent with that observed in the randomised screening trials .
MATERIALS AND METHODS
All female residents of the East Anglian region ( as delineated when screening began ) aged 50-70 years and registered with a general practitioner were invited to attend breast screening once in every 3 years .
The __NHSBSP__ was established in the counties of Norfolk , Suffolk , and Cambridgeshire in 1989 .
For sample size , assuming a relative risk of 0.68 , and a 70% coverage , 264 cases and 528 matched controls would detect a significant effect with 80% power at the 5% level with a two-sided test .
We therefore aimed for 300 cases and 600 controls as a fail-safe measure .
Cases were deaths from female breast cancer in women aged 50-70 years at diagnosis from 1995 onwards , to avoid the accumulation found in the prevalent round of the screening programme , and to minimise screening opportunity bias .
Deaths were included for which breast cancer was given as the primary or a contributory cause on the death certificate .
We excluded those women who had not been invited to breast screening at least once .
Cases were taken at random from the EA cancer registry database .
There were two controls for each case and matched by date of birth , most coming from the same health authority .
The controls were all alive at the time of death of their case and were also known to the data source before the diagnosis of the case .
Controls were obtained from the __NHS__ Exeter System database and individual screening units .
Each control was allocated a pseudodiagnosis date equal to the date of diagnosis of that control 's matched case .
The following information was obtained :
* date of birth ,
* date of diagnosis ( if a case ) ,
* stage at diagnosis ( if a case ) ,
* date of death ( if a case ) , and
* complete screening history including dates of invitations and attendances , and outcomes of attendances .
Statistical analysis
The data were analysed by conditional logistic regression .
The primary outcome of whether a woman had ever attended breast screening prior to diagnosis / pseudodiagnosis is potentially subject to self-selection or healthy volunteer bias , as it compares women who choose to take up the invitation to screening with women who do not .
The latter may have poorer health a priori and therefore be more likely to die of the disease , independent of screening .
An adjustment can be made for this using the relative rate of breast cancer deaths in non-attenders in the randomised trials compared to the trial controls .
As an alternative , we adjusted for socio-economic status as measured by the __IMD__ derived from the womens postcodes , in the logistic regression , as this is the main confounding factor of outcome and attendance .
The __IMD__ is an area-based measure of relative deprivation , based on census statistics for overcrowded housing and other factors .
Secondary analyses included the time since last screen attended , age at first attendance , and the number of screens attended .
RESULTS
Out of the 300 cases identified , 16 were excluded because they were diagnosed while awaiting their first screening invitation .
The remaining 284 were matched on birth date to two controls each , giving a total study population of 852 women .
Slightly more controls than cases were in the two most affluent deprivation groups 1 and 2 ( 51 versus 48% ) and slightly fewer in groups 3 and 4 , but this was not significant ( P=0.3 ) .
The average age at diagnosis / pseudodiagnosis was 60.7 years ( range 50.4-70.5 ) for both cases and controls as expected due to the matching .
Mean age at first screen was 55.3 for cases and 55.5 for controls .
The mean number of screens was 1.39 for the cases compared with 1.70 for the controls , a significant difference ( P<0.001 ) .
More than 85% ( 242 / 284 ) of the cases presented symptomatically , 58% as interval cancers and 27% in women who had never attended screening .
As might be expected with fatal cancers , the tumours were at relatively advanced stages , with 49% being at TMN stage 2 and 37% at stage 3 or 4. The average age at death was 63.0 years ( range 50.8-77.6 ) and average time from diagnosis to death was 2.4 years , ranging from 3 days to 8.8 years .
The years of diagnosis and death ranged from 1995 to 2004 .
The unadjusted OR of women who attended at least one routine screen compared to those who never attended screening was 0.35 ( 95% CI : 0.24 , 0.51 ; P<0.001 ) .
Adjusting for self-selection bias using the more conservative intention-to-treat analysis gave a 35% estimated mortality reduction ( OR=0.65 , 95% CI : 0.48 , 0.88 ; P=0.005 ) .
Actually being screened , adjusted for self-selection bias , was associated with a 48% reduction ( OR=0.52 , 95% CI 0.32 , 0.84 ; P=0.007 ) .
As an alternative to self-selection bias correction , adjustment for __IMD__ had no effect on the OR associated with ever being screened ( OR=0.35 , 95% CI 0.23-0.51 , P<0.001 ) .
The major effect of any screens attended is an approximately 60% lower risk of death from breast cancer compared to those who had attended none ; there was no significant effect for number of screens attended .
Risk was higher in those with a screen within 1 year than those whose last screen was between 1 and 2 years prior to diagnosis or pseudodiagnosis , due to deaths from screen-detected cancers .
Thereafter , risk increased with increasing time since last screen .
Risk was higher in those whose first screen took place at age 52 or more compared to age 51 or less , but the trend was not significant , possibly due to the small numbers .
DISCUSSION
The results of this study are encouraging .
After adjusting for self-selection bias , we found a significant 35% reduction in breast cancer mortality in association with invitation to screening and a significant 48% reduction with actually being screened , if anything , exceeding the benefits in the randomised trials .
However , the correction method makes an important assumption that the relative mortality for non-compliers compared with a population not invited for screening is the same in the programme in question as in the randomised trials .
From the available information ( the Swedish Two-county , Malmö , Gothenburg , Stockholm and Canadian trials ) , non-attenders had a 36% higher risk of breast cancer mortality than uninvited controls .
This may not hold for our population , but it seems likely that there is at least some self-selection bias , and the uncorrected estimates of the mortality reduction seem implausible .
There is a suggestive increase in risk with first screen at 52 or over , suggesting that there is an advantage to a first screen at the lower age limit of 50 , though the trend was not significant ; it should be examined in other studies .
Adjustment for __IMD__ made no difference to the estimated effect of screening on risk , perhaps because although socioeconomic status is strongly associated with screening in urban areas , it may not be so in rural areas .
In East Anglia , __IMD__ was not strongly related to screening exposure , around 84% regardless of __IMD__ .
There was no substantial trend in risk with number of screens attended , consistent with the fact that only the screen at which a cancer is detected actually confers a benefit .
Aside from a high risk in those very recently screened , there was an increase in the risk with time since last screen .
The high risk in those screened in the last year could be due to screen-detected cancers .
When these are excluded , the ORs for 1-2 , 2-4 , and 4 or more years since last screen , relative to less than 1 year , were 1.05 , 1.32 , and 1.49 respectively .
From other case-control screening studies , there is a range of results from a very small benefit to large reductions in mortality as observed in this study .
Our estimated benefit may be slightly biased in favour of screening by the selection of recently diagnosed cases ( 1995-2004 ) , which will of necessity be relatively rapidly fatal and therefore may under-represent screening-exposed fatal cancers .
Restricting analysis to those diagnosed before 1999 , we obtain an uncorrected mortality reduction of 59% with ever being screened , and self-selection bias corrected estimates of 27% for invitation to screening , and 37% for actually being screened .
In conclusion , this study shows strong evidence that the __NHS__ breast screening programme in East Anglia is achieving at least a 30% reduction in breast cancer mortality in women attending screening , consistent with the randomised trials .
We recommend expanding the case-control study to other regions of the UK and internationally .
