1. Introduction
In recent years the delivery of cancer services has changed .
Care in many countries is now provided by multi-disciplinary teams and treatment recommendations are intended to be more evidence-based .
Patients are encouraged to ask for more information and there are a plethora of websites , support groups and other information sources available to patients .
For the majority of patients , however , the most credible information will be that supplied by their specialist cancer care teams.1 The integrity , continuity and congruence between team members of the information provided is important .
The recently published __NICE__ guidance on Cancer Services ( Improving Supportive and Palliative Care for Adults with Cancer ) stated that patients should have access to high-quality information materials to aid decision making.2 It is imperative that this is of high quality in particular evidence-based , balanced and regularly updated .
Such information is likely to be derived from multicentre randomised clinical trials and meta-analyses .
Some __MDTs__ have experienced difficulties working in optimally functional ways and many are unaware of the informational roles of their colleagues.3
Many options are available for women with hormone-receptor-positive breast cancer .
Arguably where there is choice and so many options , it is even more important that teams provide consistent information not just among themselves , but also in the information leaflets , brochures or websites to which they direct patients .
This study examined the information provided by a randomly selected group of breast cancer teams in the __UK__ .
__ATAC__ Trialists Group , 2002 , 2003 , 2005 ) .4 , 5 and 6 Furthermore , a reduction in contralateral breast cancer was found in the anastrozole group , with a risk reduction of 53% in hormone receptor positive tumours , compared with tamoxifen .
Longer term follow-up results will ascertain whether this difference is maintained and whether it translates into a difference in overall survival ( __ATAC__ Trialists Group , 2005 ) .6 At the time of the study ( January-May 2004 ) , the __UK__ licence for anastrozole use was related to a contra-indication for using tamoxifen .
A recent amendment of the licence now includes the approved use of anastrozole in the adjuvant treatment of post-menopausal women.6 and 7 Since the publication of the first results from the __ATAC__ trial , however , anastrozole has received considerable media attention .
This has consolidated patient pressure to prescribe anastrozole and incited wider-ranging discussions regarding treatment options with consultants .
In this context , there is an increasing scope for patients to exert their preferences , underlining the importance of well-informed discussions regarding side-effect profiles of different hormone treatments .
Tamoxifen ( T ) and anastrozole ( A ) overlap in their side-effect profiles , with some important differences.4 , 5 and 6 The updated __ATAC__ trial highlights significantly greater hot flushes following tamoxifen compared with anastrozole ( T = 40.9% versus A = 35.7% ; P < 0.0001 ) , with an increased risk in venous thrombo-embolic and cerebrovascular events in favour of anastrozole ( T = 4.5% versus A = 2.8% ( P < 0.0004 ) and T = 2.8% versus A = 2.0% ( P = 0.03 ) , respectively ) .5 and 6 A small tamoxifen-associated increased risk of endometrial cancer ( T = 0.5% versus A = 0.2% ; P = 0.02 ) was also observed.6 Anastrozole-associated additional events related to a higher risk of arthralgia and fractures compared with tamoxifen ( T = 29.4% versus A = 35.6% ( P < 0.0001 ) and T = 7.7% versus A = 11.0% ( P < 0.0001 ) , respectively ) .6 Significantly ( P < 0.05 ) fewer patients in the anastrozole group reported problems with vaginal bleeding ( A = 5.4% , T = 10.2% ; P < 0.0001 ) or vaginal discharge ( A = 3.5% , T = 13.2% ; P < 0.0001 ) at 68 months .
6 , 8 , 9 and 10 Simil__OR__ 0.7 ) at 5 years , whereas the opposite was true for vaginal dryness ( A = 18.5% , T = 9.1% ; __OR__ 2.0 ) , dyspareunia ( A = 17.3% , T = 8.1% ; __OR__ 2.5 ) and loss of libido ( A = 34% , T = 26.1% ; __OR__ 1.5 ) .8 , 9 and 10 Extended tamoxifen use ( over 5 years ) has been associated with an increased risk of developing cataracts.11 , with no differences between the treatment groups in the __ATAC__ trial .
4 , 5 and 6
A number of other less frequent and / or less serious side-effects relate to tiredness , mood disturbances and gastrointestinal problems , including nausea / vomiting , with similar frequencies for women in both groups of the __ATAC__ trial.8 and 9
The present study focuses on the content , extent and frequency that side-effect profiles of these two treatments are communicated to patients by breast cancer teams .
Each treatment is associated with its own set of potentially serious side-effects , as well as less serious , but persistent ones .
Against a background of increased treatment choices , there is evidence that patients value being fully informed .
12 , despite others preferring to take the consultant 's advice and participate less in decision-making.13 We specifically report the information that breast care teams believe they give to patients concerning the side-effects of tamoxifen and anastrozole and discuss how this may affect patients perceptions of how the side-effect profiles compare .
We also look at the consistency of information-giving between team members .
2. Participants and methods
2.1. Participants
Letters were written to 29 surgeons inviting them to participate in the study .
The surgeons were chosen randomly from 11 cancer centres and 3 district general hospitals in the __UK__ ( see Acknowledgements ) so as to be representative of multidisciplinary working .
Twenty-three positive replies were received and six surgeons did not reply .
Of those who agreed to participate , six surgeons were unable to be interviewed during the time frame of the study .
Dates were arranged to see all remaining surgeons and at least one breast cancer nurse who worked with them .
An oncologist from each team was identified and invited to participate in the study .
All oncologists agreed to participate , however one oncologist was unable to be seen during the course of the data collection period .
With respect to two of the teams , we were able to interview two surgeons and two breast care nurses .
Two of the interviewed teams shared the same surgeon , but were assessed separately because they were based at different hospitals and used a different oncologist and breast care nurse .
In total 16 teams , comprising 50 health professionals ( 17 surgeons , 15 oncologists and 18 breast care nurses ) , participated in the study .
2.2. Procedure
The interviews were conducted by a researcher ( RMcG ) at the hospitals where the teams were based .
Participants were seen individually and permission was sought to audiotape the interview .
The researcher explained that the study was evaluating how the side-effects of tamoxifen and anastrozole were explained to patients .
The reason given for carrying out this research was that we were interested in the information that patients may potentially use to form a treatment preference .
It was clarified that the questions should emulate those discussed at the initial patient consultation relating to the commencement of adjuvant hormone treatments .
The researcher then used an interview protocol to guide the rest of the interview .
The question from the interview protocol that elicited the information used in this study was : Can you tell me the side-effects that you always mention to women when talking about adjuvant treatment with tamoxifen? A prompt list was used after the interviewee had given a free recall response .
Items included on the prompt list were generated from data from the main __ATAC__ study and the quality of life sub-protocol.4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 and 10 The interviews usually lasted no more than half an hour .
3. Results
Summarised in Fig. 1 , Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 are the results on the main side-effects that were mentioned for each treatment , grouped by discipline .
For each side-effect , the interviewee was classified as either consistently mentioning that side-effect or not mentioning it .
Therefore , if the interviewee said that they sometimes mentioned that side-effect or would mention it only if asked , then this was categorised as not being consistently mentioned .
It can be seen that for both treatments , vasomotor symptoms were the most frequently mentioned side-effect ( 94% of surgeons ( S ) and 100% of nurses ( N ) and oncologists ( O ) always mentioned these with tamoxifen , and 72% of S , 100% of O and 94% of N always mentioned these with anastrozole ) .
Many of the interviewees said that they told patients that hot flushes and other vasomotor symptoms may be less of a problem with anastrozole than with tamoxifen .
Vaginal bleeding ( S = 67% , O = 93% , N = 72% ) , endometrial cancer ( S = 61% , O = 80% , N = 67% ) and thrombo-embolic events ( S = 61% , O = 60% , N = 72% ) were , after hot flushes , the next most frequently mentioned side-effects for tamoxifen .
Arthralgia ( S = 50% , O = 73% , N = 39% ) and loss of bone density / fractures ( S = 78% , O = 100% , N = 39% ) were the next most commonly mentioned side-effects for anastrozole after hot flushes .
Of all three professions , nurses were the least reliable source of information about loss of bone density or arthralgia .
Vaginal dryness/discharge / itching were consistently mentioned more often when discussing tamoxifen versus anastrozole ( S = 22% versus 11% , O = 73% versus 20% , N = 67% versus 44% , respectively ) .
Sexual problems were rarely mentioned for either treatment ( tamoxifen : S = 6% , O = 7% , N = 6% , anastrozole : S = 0% , O = 13% , N = 6% ) .
Gastrointestinal side-effects ( e.g. nausea , vomiting , diarrhoea , constipation , bloating ) were addressed more frequently in relation to tamoxifen compared with anastrozole ( S = 33% versus 0% , O = 40% versus 27% , N = 61% versus 39% , respectively ) .
Similarly , professionals from all disciplines mentioned weight gain and mood swings more consistently when talking about tamoxifen compared with anastrozole .
Occasionally , there was a marked variation between professions regarding the frequency that certain side-effects are discussed ; in particular , the possibility of tamoxifen-associated weight-gain as mentioned by significantly fewer surgeons ( 28% ) compared with others ( O = 53% and N = 72% ) . Fig. 1 , Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 illustrate a consistent tendency by oncologists ( O ) and nurses ( N ) to discuss any particular side-effect compared with surgeons ( S ) , with a further example relating to tamoxifen-associated effects on the eye .
A number of perceived lesser side-effects were rarely mentioned and included skin rash , headaches , dizziness / light-headedness , hair thinning , tiredness / weakness ; with others exclusively mentioned in relation to tamoxifen ( memory / concentration issues , sleep disturbances , hirsutism , voice changes and fluid retention / bloating ) .
3.1. Adjuvant hormone information leaflets
Table 1 depicts the range of information leaflets pertaining to tamoxifen and anastrozole currently being used by the participating teams in this study , with some teams using more than one source of leaflet , whilst __BCC__ -derived leaflets were mostly used .
Notably older versions of anastrozole leaflets were also in use .
Table 2 and Table 3 show the side-effects listed in the information leaflets for each treatment .
There were some additional side-effects and issues mentioned in leaflets for tamoxifen :
- the potential for tamoxifen to provide benefits for bone health was stated in all but one leaflet ( in-house team 15 ) and similarly in all but two leaflets ( in-house teams 5 and 15 ) , there was information regarding its potential cardioprotective effects ; in addition to its established chemoprevention effects with respect to contralateral breast cancers ( omitted in four leaflets ; in-house teams 9a , 9b and 10 , plus Tenovus ) ;
- the following side-effects were each listed in two leaflets : sexual problems ( in-house teams 9a & b ) , brittle nails ( in-house teams 9a & 10 ) , skin rash ( in-house team 9a & Tenovus ) , changes to singing voice ( Breast Cancer Care & in-house team 9a ) , liver cancer in rats ( Breast Cancer Care and Tenovus ) , dizziness / light-headedness ( in-house team 9a & Tenovus ) and fluid retention / bloating ( in-house team 9a & Tenovus ) ;
- the following side-effects were each listed in one leaflet only : mood swings ( Tenovus ) , tiredness ( in-house team 9b ) , headache ( Breast Cancer Care ) , leg cramps at night ( Breast Cancer Care ) , increase in downy facial hair ( Breast Cancer Care ) , liver problems ( Tenovus ) , tendency to bruise more easily ( Tenovus ) .
All leaflets for both treatments listed hot flushes as a possible side-effect .
All but one of the leaflets for tamoxifen referred to vaginal dryness / discharge or itching , and all leaflets for anastrozole referred to vaginal dryness as a possible side-effect .
Potential gastrointestinal problems were listed in five of the eight leaflets for tamoxifen , and in all seven leaflets for anastrozole .
All of the leaflets for tamoxifen referred to the small risk of endometrial cancer , whereas vaginal bleeding was listed in only five of the eight leaflets .
The three leaflets that did not refer to vaginal bleeding were in-house produced .
Only half of the leaflets for tamoxifen listed thrombo-embolic events as a potential side-effect , with most of these ( three out of four ) being in-house produced .
Five out of the eight leaflets for tamoxifen referred to weight gain .
Half of the tamoxifen leaflets listed eye problems as a possible side-effect .
Arthralgia was listed in five out of the seven leaflets used for anastrozole , however potential loss of bone density was only listed in two leaflets .
Loss of bone density is only listed in the more recent version of the Breast Cancer Care leaflets for anastrozole .
Six out of the seven leaflets used for anastrozole referred to skin rash / sensitivity , hair thinning , headaches and vaginal bleeding , and five listed tiredness / weakness as a potential side-effect .
3.2. Reporting consistency of side-effects within teams
Consistency within each team revealed a mixed pattern of results , with internal consistency being high for reporting of some side-effects and low for others .
Examples showing the greatest disparity are discussed as follows : the only side-effect for which internal consistency was strong across every team was hot flushes .
Nearly everyone in each team talked about hot flushes with tamoxifen and , to a slightly lesser extent , with anastrozole .
Discrepancies in reporting tamoxifen-associated endometrial cancer were evident , with this being consistently mentioned by all professionals within seven out of 16 teams and similarly for associated thrombo-embolic events that were reported conscientiously by all team members in five out of 16 teams ( data not shown ) .
For both of these side-effects , the number of people in each team who mentioned them ranged from everybody to no-one , although in the majority of teams these side-effects were mentioned by more than one person .
Notably in one team , all professionals omitted to mention endometrial cancer and likewise this phenomenon was repeated with respect to thrombo-embolic events in two teams ( data not shown ) .
Anastrozole-associated loss of bone density was uniformly reported by all professionals in only six out of 16 teams evaluated ( data not shown ) .
A similar pattern was evident with a wide variation in the number of team members discussing this side-effect .
There were no teams where internal consistency was high for every side-effect .
In the teams where more than one nurse or surgeon was interviewed , it was apparent that even within a professional discipline , there was a large degree of individual variation in the content and spectrum of side-effect profiles that are discussed .
4. Discussion
When starting patients on adjuvant treatment with either tamoxifen or anastrozole certain side-effects were usually mentioned by the teams we interviewed .
Patients would always be told about hot flushes / sweats for both treatments .
If patients were taking tamoxifen they would also be told about vaginal bleeding and vaginal dryness/discharge / itching , and at least one person in almost every team discussed the risk of thrombo-embolic events , endometrial cancer and weight gain .
Gastrointestinal symptoms were also frequently mentioned for tamoxifen , and mood swings and eye problems were addressed by at least one person in about half the teams .
For patients starting anastrozole , bone density loss was mentioned in every team , and someone in all teams except one mentioned arthralgia .
Vaginal dryness/discharge / itching and gastrointestinal symptoms were mooted by at least one person in about half the teams with regard to anastrozole .
Other side-effects were also mentioned for both treatments , but with less frequency .
These findings highlight the reported breadth of side-effects discussed as opposed to their potential significance determined from __ATAC__ .
Within all teams therefore , the serious side-effects of each treatment were usually addressed .
However there were instances where no-one in the team mentioned thrombo-embolic events and / or endometrial cancer when talking about tamoxifen , and this is a cause for concern .
Usually a higher proportion of oncologists and breast care nurses talked about any given side-effect than did surgeons .
This may reflect complementary working by teams and delegation of adjuvant discussions by clinicians .
The exception to this pattern occurred with bone density loss and arthralgia .
It was noticeable that , out of all team members , nurses were the least likely to mention these two side-effects .
This is a point of issue , as it is often the nurse who spends most time talking with patients .
Therefore it is important that nurses are well informed about the risk of bone density loss and arthralgia , and that teams ensure these issues are discussed with patients .
Most of the leaflets given to patients for anastrozole did not list the potential effect on bone density .
This problem was compounded by older versions of leaflets being used .
There were also serious omissions in some of the patient information leaflets , e.g. leaflets for tamoxifen not referring to vaginal bleeding and thrombo-embolic events .
This was particularly prevalent for many of the in-house produced leaflets .
Even if members of the team mention these side-effects , they should be substantiated with written information , based on prior studies suggesting that patients do not always retain the information they receive in consultations.13 Contrary to this , many of the information leaflets used for tamoxifen listed rare and unusual side-effects , such as a tendency to bruise more easily , or a tamoxifen-associated increase in liver cancer in rats , with a questionable validity of such patient information .
Overall the consistency between the information given by teams and that in leaflets was low .
There were many side-effects that were frequently mentioned in leaflets , but rarely , if ever , mentioned by the breast care team .
A particular example of this was vaginal bleeding with anastrozole ; all but one of the leaflets referred to this , but only 3 out of 51 health professionals mentioned it to patients , in all likelihood due to its significantly lower frequency following anastrozole.4 and 6 The __ATAC__ trial data showed that vaginal bleeding occurred in 5.4% of patients taking anastrozole compared with 10.2% of patients taking tamoxifen.6 , 8 , 9 and 10 However , given the significance of post-menopausal vaginal bleeding as a possible indicator of endometrial cancer , it remains important that patients are informed of the possible relevance of timely reporting of vaginal bleeding .
There were a number of side-effects that were mentioned with different frequencies for the two treatments , even though there is no suggestion in the literature that the treatments differ in these respects .
In particular , team members discussed vaginal dryness / discharge and itching collectively and more frequently for tamoxifen than for anastrozole .
This may reflect the __ATAC__ trial results showing a significant tamoxifen-associated increase in vaginal discharge compared with anastrozole , however , the quality of life ( QoL ) sub-protocol showed an anastrozole preponderance of vaginal itching / irritation and dryness .
6 , 8 , 9 and 10 Gastrointestinal problems were mentioned more often by team members in association with tamoxifen than anastrozole , although the reverse was true in the leaflets .
Data from the __ATAC__ trial showed no difference between groups in terms of nausea / vomiting ( A = 12.7% , T = 12.4% ) , and data from the quality of life assessment showed that there were no clear differences between patients in either group with respect to gastrointestinal side-effects such as nausea , diarrhoea , and feeling bloated.8 and 9 Psychological problems and weight gain were also more frequently addressed for tamoxifen than for anastrozole , although there has been no reported difference between groups regarding these side-effects in either the main __ATAC__ trial or the quality of life assessment .
The issue of whether tamoxifen is directly linked to weight gain is controversial , in the context of no level-one evidence.14 and 15 In the short-term anastrozole is not associated with weight gain ; that may relate in large part to its shorter history of use as an adjuvant treatment compared with tamoxifen.8 and 9 Patient information leaflets for anastrozole were more likely to refer to tiredness or headaches as a potential problem than were leaflets for tamoxifen .
Again there is no suggestion in the literature that the treatments differ in terms of these side-effects.8 and 9 Half the leaflets for tamoxifen referred to risk-reduction for contralateral breast cancers , though none of the leaflets for anastrozole mentioned this , despite the fact that it is significantly more effective than tamoxifen in this respect.4 , 5 and 6 These spurious differences raise the question of the rationale for mentioning / not mentioning a side-effect , or for including / excluding a side-effect or benefit of the drug in an information leaflet .
If patients were to compare the side-effect profiles of tamoxifen and anastrozole on the basis of the information given by teams and leaflets in the present study , it is likely that they would have a false impression of differences in the frequency of certain side-effects .
The majority of interviewees in this study were not routinely giving patients a choice between the two treatments .
It is likely that , were patients to be offered a choice between tamoxifen and anastrozole , what is said about the side-effects of each treatment and how they relate to each other would change .
During this study , anastrozole was not being used frequently by many teams except in large part where tamoxifen was either contra-indicated or poorly tolerated .
Further use of anastrozole may have also been recommended in high-risk HER-2 overexpressing breast cancers.16 , 17 , 18 and 19 Therefore anastrozole was often being discussed in the context of not recommending tamoxifen , perhaps leading to preferential emphasis of certain side-effects and not others .
Patients were often informed that they may be less likely to suffer from hot flushes with anastrozole , and that they did not have to worry about an increased risk of endometrial cancer or thrombo-embolic events .
On the other hand , as discussed earlier , they were not always adequately informed regarding the possibility of developing osteoporosis and secondary fractures following treatment with anastrozole .
Importantly , a number of factors may have influenced the data collection .
Of relevance is that interviewees were asked which side-effects they mentioned to patients when starting adjuvant treatment .
Some side-effects may be discussed more frequently in follow-up meetings , including sexual problems or those that occur with longer term use of treatment .
However , from the point of view of decision-making , it is not helpful if patients are told about potential longer term side-effects after treatment has commenced .
Also some interviewees responded that the information they gave to patients about side-effects could vary for a number of reasons ; for example the patient 's age may influence what information is given to them about bone thinning , menopausal symptoms and sexual problems .
In the present study , if the interviewee only talked about a side-effect occasionally , they were classified as not talking about it consistently , and this may have lead to under-reporting of the frequency with which some side-effects were mentioned .
The overall conclusion from this study is that there are areas where both the consistency and the quality of information about the side-effects of anastrozole and tamoxifen could be improved .
It is not crucial that all professionals in a team consistently reiterate the same thing , but it is important to ensure that the key side-effects are covered by at least one person in each team and that standardised written information is provided to substantiate these .
Individual team members should be aware of the current literature relating to side-effects and their potential influence on QoL , to justify why they are mentioning certain side-effects and not others .
4 , 5 , 6 __ATAC__ Trialists Group .
Results of the __ATAC__ trial after completion of 5 years adjuvant treatment for breast cancer .
Lancet 2005;365:60 - 62.6 , 8 , 9 and 10 The content of information leaflets needs to be appraised to ensure that serious side-effects are included and that there is a clear rationale for including / excluding side-effects .
Ideally leaflets should be a reliable tool for use during consultations to avoid omissions and inaccurate reporting of side-effects .
It would be advisable to have a uniform consensus agreement , nationally , regarding the standardised reporting of key side-effects derived from amended pharmaceutical updates .
Although these conclusions suggest a __UK__ phenomenon , we propose that many of these findings merit a future international study .
